FIGURE 62-5. 
Anexample 
of a 
CT 
perfusionobtainedona 
73-year-oldmanwhowent 
tobed 
at 
11pmandwoke 
upat 
7amwithleft-sidedweakness,right 
gaze 
deviation,andleft-sided 
homonymous 
hemianopia 
andneglect. 
His 
signs 
andsymptoms 
were 
consistent 
withright 
MCA 
syndrome. 
The 
CTP 
shows 
anarea 
of criticallyreducedcerebralbloodflow 
(markedinred 
color) that 
represents 
possible 
core 
ischemic 
infarct 
surroundedbyanarea 
of hypoperfused 
tissue 
(markedingreencolor) that 
represents 
possible 
ischemic 
penumbra. 
The 
CT 
angiogram 
showedanintracranialM1segment 
occlusion,whichqualifiedthe 
patient 
for MT. 
The 
patient 
was 
immediatelytakentoa 
neuroangiosuite,andanMT 
withstent-retriever device 
was 
performed. 
The 
patient’s 
symptoms 
significantlyimprovedonday3of his 
admission. 
His 
only 
neurologicaldeficit 
was 
a 
mildleft-sidedfacialdroop. 


Post-reperfusion management: After the completion of the acute 
reperfusion therapies, patients should be admitted to a dedicated 
neurological care unit to monitor for neurological deterioration and 
cardiovascular or systemic complications and to complete investigations to 
determine the ischemic stroke mechanism. Upon successful reperfusion, the 
goal is to maintain hemodynamic stability, targeting gradual normotension. 
Severe resistant hypertension has been shown to increase the risk of ICH and 
so, after IVT, the widely accepted routine practice is to maintain blood 
pressure ranges < 180/105 mm Hg for at least 24 hours while avoiding rapid 
fluctuations, followed by a 24-hour CT scan or an MRI of the brain to rule 
out intracranial hemorrhage. To achieve this goal, intravenous 
antihypertensive medications such as labetalol, as needed, or continuous 



infusions of medications such as nicardipine are generally used. Typically, 
until the 24-hour CT/MRI scan rules out an ICH, pharmacological DVT 
prophylaxis and antithrombotic agents are avoided unless there is a strong 
indication to do so. There are no clear guidelines regarding optimal blood 
pressure goals after successful MT but depending on the degree of 
reperfusion, targeting normotension is a widely accepted routine practice 
until there is more robust data available. Similarly, hyperglycemia has been 
shown to be associated with poor stroke outcomes, and the patients admitted 
to the hospital who have severe hyperglycemia should be on standardized 
insulin protocols to treat and closely monitor their regular blood sugars. The 
Stroke Hyperglycemia Insulin Network Effort (SHINE) randomized 
controlled trial enrolled 1151 acute ischemic stroke patients and randomized 
nearly half of them to an interventional protocol with IV insulin to maintain 
blood sugar between 80 and 130 mg/dL and did not find any benefit in this 
group of patients when compared to the other half of the patients in the group 
that received standard care with subcutaneous insulin to maintain blood 
glucose between 80 and 179 mg/dL. Subsequently, intensive lowering of 
blood sugar is not currently recommended in routine practice caring for acute 
stroke patients. For patients who do not receive acute reperfusion therapies, 
maintaining cerebral perfusion pressures is critical, and the blood pressure is 
allowed to autoregulate with permissible systolic blood pressure (SBP) up 
to 220 mm Hg in the first 24 to 48 hours, subsequently aiming to gently lower 
blood pressure (with SBP goals of 160–180 mm Hg) within 24 to 72 hours of 
ischemic stroke onset. Close attention must be paid to the neurologic 
examination, as abrupt blood pressure drops may lead to hypoperfusion of an 
arterial territory at risk of infarction. 


Common medical complications of stroke include aspiration pneumonia, 
DVT, and pulmonary embolism. When indwelling bladder catheters are used, 
urinary tract infection is an additional concern. All stroke patients with 
evidence of dysarthria, aphasia, cough, or aspiration should have a formal 
swallowing evaluation before being allowed to take food, liquid, or 
medicines by mouth. Some patients may require placement of a percutaneous 
endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) feeding tube, which, in most cases, can be 
removed in several months when the ability to swallow improves. DVT can 
be prevented by the administration of subcutaneous heparin or the use of 
pneumatic compression boots, followed by ambulation as soon as possible. 



Attention should be made to avoid hyperthermia, which may lead to poorer 
stroke outcomes. 


Earlystroke 
preventionstrategies Aspirin is the most common antithrombotic 
agent used for secondary stroke prevention after a stroke or a TIA. Typically, 
unless there are contraindications or excessive risks of bleeding, aspirin 50 
to 325 mg/day is initiated as soon as possible after an ischemic stroke or a 
TIA. The risk of recurrent stroke after an ischemic stroke or a TIA is the 
highest in the first few days/weeks after the index event, thought to be as high 
as 10% within a week after a TIA or minor stroke, depending on the 
underlying stroke etiology. Although aspirin has been shown to be beneficial 
for long-term secondary stroke prevention, the most benefit is obtained in the 
first few days after the index TIA/stroke. Caution should be exercised when 
prescribing aspirin to patients who have known history of gastrointestinal 
ulceration/bleeding, although aspirin in 50 to 325 mg/day doses has been 
shown to be tolerated well in general. Clopidogrel is also used as a first-line 
agent for secondary stroke prevention. In a randomized, blinded trial of 
clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients at risk of ischemic events (CAPRIE) 
that randomized patients with a recent stroke, MI, or peripheral arterial 
disease to daily treatment with clopidogrel or aspirin, clopidogrel was 
associated with a modest reduction in overall primary outcome of stroke, MI, 
or vascular death, but in subgroup analysis, the outcomes between the two 
groups did not differ among patients who had a recent MI or a stroke. Some 
patients exhibit nonresponsiveness to clopidogrel, and although ticagrelor 
has been considered an effective substitute, it was not shown to be superior 
to aspirin alone for secondary prevention of stroke, MI, or death at 90 days 
in the Acute Stroke or Transient Ischemic Attack Treated with Aspirin or 
Ticagrelor and Patient Outcomes (SOCRATES) trial. The choice of 
antiplatelet therapy is dependent mainly on patient tolerance, 
contraindications, availability, and cost, and while the combination of aspirin 
plus extended-release dipyridamole has shown modest benefit over aspirin, 
its side effect profile with headache and gastrointestinal symptoms has 
limited its use. There is some data on the use of cilostazol as a second-line 
agent for patients with aspirin allergy in Asian patients, but high-quality data 
supporting the use of cilostazol in non-Asian ethnic groups is lacking and has 
limited its use. 


Due to the high stroke recurrence rate in the early period after the index 
stroke/TIA, there has been an ongoing interest to find optimal treatment 



strategies to minimize this risk. The Clopidogrel in High-Risk Patients with 
Acute Nondisabling Cerebrovascular Events (CHANCE) trial randomized 
patients with acute high-risk TIA or a minor stroke to an interventional arm 
consisting of treatment with aspirin and clopidogrel for 3 weeks post the 
index event followed by placebo until 90 days and a control arm consisting 
of daily aspirin-treated patients and compared the primary outcome of 
recurrent stroke among these patients in 114 clinical centers in China. A total 
of 5170 patients were enrolled, and recurrent strokes occurred more 
frequently in the control arm at 11.7% versus the interventional arm at 8.2%, 
showing that addition of clopidogrel within first 24 hours after the index 
high-risk TIA or minor stroke for a total of 21 days resulted in 32% risk 
reduction for recurrent stroke, without increasing the bleeding risks 
significantly. Recently, a multicenter, multinational, randomized clinical trial, 
titled Platelet-Oriented Inhibition in New TIA and minor stroke (POINT), 
tested the efficacy of a combination of dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) in 
the intervention arm against single antiplatelet therapy in the control arm for 
a total of 90 days after the index high-risk TIA or minor stroke and enrolled 
4881 patients in North America, Europe, Australia, and New Zealand. The 
primary efficacy outcome for recurrent ischemic stroke, MI, or death from 
ischemic vascular causes was significantly lower in the intervention arm 
(5%) versus control arm (6.5%); however, the risk of major hemorrhage in 
the intervention arm (0.9%) was also higher as compared to the control arm 
(0.4%). The reason for higher risk of major hemorrhage was thought to be 
possibly related to the higher loading dose of clopidogrel, and a longer 
duration of treatment with DAPT in the POINT trial (3 months) as compared 
to CHANCE trial (3 weeks). Moreover, the benefit of DAPT in recurrent 
ischemic stroke reduction was shown to be maximum in the first 30 days 
after the index event, whereas the bleeding risk built up after a week of 
initiating the DAPT. Combining the findings of these two studies, the current 
AHA/ASA guidelines on early management of acute ischemic stroke strongly 
recommend considering a short course of DAPT with aspirin and clopidogrel 
initiated within 24 hours from symptom onset after a high-risk TIA or a minor 
ischemic stroke (provided the patient did not receive IVT) for a total of 21 
days. This benefit of DAPT was mirrored in another randomized clinical 
trial, Acute Stroke or Transient Ischemic Attack Treated with Ticagrelor and 
ASA for Prevention of Stroke and Death (THALES), that utilized ticagrelor 
as the second antiplatelet agent substituting clopidogrel. However, the risk of 



major hemorrhage, including fatal and intracranial hemorrhage, was elevated 
among patients randomized to the intervention arm receiving aspirin plus 
ticagrelor for a total of 30 days. 


Acute cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) may have varied 
presentations including ischemic stroke, ICH, headache, seizures, etc. It is 
routine practice to consider early anticoagulation with either unfractionated 
heparin (UFH) or low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) for the treatment 
of this condition, oftentimes even if the patient presents with baseline ICH. 
Following a period of neurological stabilization, the mode of anticoagulation 
is switched to oral anticoagulants, such as warfarin for a period of 3 to 6 
months, or until resolution of CVST on follow-up imaging depending on the 
risks versus benefits. In a recent study, dabigatran was found to have similar 
efficacy in patients with mild to moderate CVST in preventing recurrent 
sinus thrombosis. 


Extracranial cervical artery dissection is another established etiology of 
acute ischemic stroke, which is more common in young adults as opposed to 
the geriatric population. It may present with headache, Horner syndrome, 
cranial neuropathies, or ischemic stroke/TIA. Although evidence in support 
of optimal treatment is limited, it suggests that the either aspirin/dual 
antiplatelet therapy or anticoagulation for short term may be reasonable 
choices for secondary stroke prevention. The choice of antithrombotic 
regimen should be based on the treating physician’s experience, radiological 
findings including size of stroke, if any, patient comorbidities after a detailed 
discussion of risks versus benefits with the patient, and consideration of 
patient preference for subsequent therapy. 


Early recurrent stroke prevention management is dependent on the 
presumed stroke mechanism, as explored below. 


Extracranial 
Large-Artery 
Atherosclerosis Surgical therapeutic options can be 
considered in this subacute phase. Carotid revascularization procedures may 
be applied in two distinct clinical settings: (1) symptomatic disease and (2) 
asymptomatic disease. The efficacy of carotid endarterectomy for 
symptomatic disease is high when there is a 70% to 99% stenosis, but 
modest when there is a 50% to 69% stenosis. Carotid endarterectomy for 
mild-to-moderate stroke or TIA in the territory of the ICA has been proven 
effective by the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial 
(NASCET) study, for patients with both 70% to 99% and 50% to 69% 
stenosis. Patients with severe stroke in the middle cerebral artery territory 



are not appropriate for carotid endarterectomy in the subacute phase. If the 
patient with severe stroke improves in rehabilitation to the point where 
worsening of the deficit would be problematic from recurrent stroke, then 
endarterectomy can be reconsidered. The surgical benefit for patients with 
symptomatic moderate stenosis was statistically significant but small, with 
only 1.5% absolute risk reduction per year, and therefore surgery should only 
be considered in centers with low perioperative rates of surgical morbidity. 
The decision to perform carotid endarterectomy for symptomatic moderate 
carotid stenosis should be made on an individual basis, considering the 
patient’s surgical risk, center-specific perioperative complication rate, and 
the patient’s life expectancy. Because the surgical risk occurs upfront during 
the perioperative period, the benefit from surgery accrues with increased 
years of life. For the older adults, the risks and benefits must be carefully 
weighed, and surgery should be withheld for patients with life expectancy 
fewer than 5 years. When there is symptomatic severe stenosis (70%–99% 
luminal narrowing), the surgical benefit is, by contrast, quite high, and most 
patients will benefit from surgical rather than medical management. 


Carotid artery stenting (CAS) with angioplasty and stenting of the ICA 
plaque has gained ground as an alternative to carotid endarterectomy. 
Advantages include shorter hospital stay, lack of a neck incision, avoidance 
of general anesthesia, and a lower incidence of cranial neuropathy as a 
complication. A significant concern, however, is the risk of distal 
embolization of thrombus or fragments of atheroma dislodged during arterial 
access, balloon inflation, or stent deployment. An evolving array of 
embolization protection devices, deployed distal to the stent, are designed to 
limit this risk. Stenting is still an option for patients at high risk for 
complications from endarterectomy, including those with medical 
comorbidities, unfavorable neck anatomy, contralateral carotid occlusion, 
and restenosis at previous endarterectomy site. Randomized trials have 
addressed whether stenting can produce results as good as endarterectomy. 
Two trials, Endarterectomy versus Angioplasty in Patients with Symptomatic 
Severe Carotid Stenosis (EVA-3S) and Stent-Supported Percutaneous 
Angioplasty of the Carotid Artery versus Endarterectomy (SPACE), showed 
that, in symptomatic patients with greater than 60% ICA stenosis, carotid 
endarterectomy was associated with lower 30-day rates of major 
complications such as stroke and MI when compared to carotid stenting. By 
contrast, the Stenting and Angioplasty with Protection in Patients at High 



Risk for Endarterectomy (SAPPHIRE) trial, which included only patients 
who were deemed poor operative candidates for endarterectomy, showed 
equivalency between stenting and endarterectomy, with slightly lower 
complication rates in the stenting group. The Carotid Revascularization 
Endarterectomy versus Stent Trial (CREST) randomized patients with recent 
hemispheric TIA, ocular TIA, or minor stroke, with at least 50% to 70% 
carotid stenosis. There were no significant differences between 
endarterectomy and stenting for the composite outcome of stroke, MI, or 
death over a 4-year follow-up period. However, during the 30-day 
periprocedural period there were significantly higher risks of stroke in 
patients undergoing stenting, and of MI in patients undergoing 
endarterectomy. Of interest, an interaction between age and treatment 
efficacy was detected (p = 0.02), with a crossover at an age of 
approximately 70 such that CAS tended to show greater efficacy at younger 
ages, and carotid endarterectomy at older ages. Thus, the treatment choice for 
carotid revascularization in symptomatic carotid artery stenosis is dependent 
on multiple factors and is usually decided after a multidisciplinary 
discussion with the neurologists, neurointerventionalists, and specialists 
performing carotid endarterectomy with shared decision-making involving 
the patient/family members considering the risks/benefits and patient 
preference for each of these procedures. 


The timing of carotid revascularization for ischemic stroke is of major 
importance. If the ischemic stroke is small, then early intervention, up to 2 
weeks poststroke, is preferable. In more extensive strokes, however, the risk 
of cerebral reperfusion injury after a revascularization procedure is high, 
especially in severe or critical intracranial carotid stenosis. In this 
circumstance, carotid revascularization procedures should be deferred to a 
later date to allow the infarcted territory to heal and to allow normalization 
of the local cerebral blood volume. Precise assessment of the degree of 
severity of the stenosis and its effect intracranially is extremely helpful when 
determining the urgency of timing of surgery. In addition, an image through 
CTA or MRA is also helpful in identifying the pathology not only in the ICA 
origin, but also in the arteries distally and in those arteries providing 
collateral flow. On the other hand, the benefit of carotid revascularization 
procedures for asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis (lack of ipsilateral 
stroke or TIA in the past 6 months) is currently not well established. 
Although earlier clinical trials provided some evidence of a modest benefit 



in this population, it is important to note that at the time of those trials, the 
medical management strategies were not as advanced as they are today and 
were not able to successfully achieve the currently accepted goals of lipid 
lowering, blood pressure reduction, and platelet inhibition. Moreover, with a 
strong emphasis on healthy lifestyle changes in addition to the medical 
management strategies, it is currently unclear whether carotid 
revascularization among patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis is truly 
superior to conservative management with a combination of medical 
management and lifestyle changes for the goal of stroke prevention. As we 
eagerly await the results of CREST-2, carotid revascularization for 
asymptomatic carotid stenosis is not offered to patients routinely but 
considered on a case-by-case basis. 


Cardioembolic 
Stroke For patients with nonvalvular AF, anticoagulant therapy 
with warfarin has been proven by randomized clinical trials to reduce the 
risk of recurrent cerebral or systemic embolism by close to 70%, as 
compared to aspirin. The international normalized ratio (INR) goal is 2 to 3. 
Novel oral anticoagulants (NOACs) such as the direct thrombin inhibitor 
dabigatran, and direct factor Xa inhibitors rivaroxaban, apixaban, and 
edoxaban have been shown to be noninferior to warfarin in prevention of 
cerebral or systemic embolism in nonvalvular AF. Further, NOACs as a 
group have a significantly lower risk of intracranial hemorrhage as compared 
to warfarin, despite a significantly higher risk of major systemic bleeding, 
mainly gastrointestinal. Despite this, there appears to be a net therapeutic 
benefit of NOACs over warfarin therapy. An additional advantage to these 
novel anticoagulants is that they do not require routine hematologic 
monitoring. Their current major disadvantage, however, is the limited 
availability of specific antidotes to counter bleeding from these medications. 
Anticoagulation is relatively contraindicated in infective endocarditis and in 
left atrial myxomatous syndromes because of associated cortical surface 
mycotic and myxomatous aneurysm with the risk of hemorrhage in the early 
phases of these diseases. 


In advanced congestive heart failure, the risk of ischemic stroke or 
systemic embolism may be elevated due to the formation of intracardiac 
clots, especially in extensive anterior wall MI with an apical aneurysm. 
Anticoagulation may be recommended early on in this setting to prevent 
initial or recurrent embolism. The Warfarin versus Aspirin in Reduced 
Cardiac Ejection Fraction (WARCEF) study enrolled patients with left 



ventricular ejection fraction less than 35% and who were in sinus rhythm. 
Patients were randomized to aspirin 325 mg daily or warfarin with goal INR 
2 to 3, and were followed up to 6 years, with mean follow-up of 3.5 years. 
There was no significant overall difference in the risk of ischemic stroke, 
hemorrhagic stroke, or death between treatment with warfarin and treatment 
with aspirin. A reduced risk of ischemic stroke with warfarin was seen, but 
this was offset by an increased risk of major systemic hemorrhage. Thus, 
there is currently no clear evidence for anticoagulation of patients with 
congestive heart failure past the acute to subacute phases of ischemic stroke. 
A PFO as a source of paradoxical embolism (thromboembolism from the 
veins into the arteries) causing a stroke has attracted a lot of interest over the 
last several decades. Earlier clinical trials showed no benefit of 
endovascular PFO closure over medical management with antiplatelet 
therapy, but recently several trials have shown a modest reduction in the risk 
of secondary stroke in carefully selected patients that underwent 
endovascular PFO closure. It is important to note that all these trials enrolled 
patients between 18 and 60 years, who were thought to be higher risk of 
paradoxical embolism and majority of the patients had high-risk PFO 
morphology that rendered them at a higher risk of secondary stroke due to the 
PFO. It is currently unclear whether endovascular PFO closure among these 
patients is superior to therapeutic anticoagulation. 


Lacunar 
Infarction The mainstay of early therapy in lacunar infarctions, in 
patients who do not receive IVT, is mostly supportive, aiming to avoid 
clinical decompensation, which can occur in the form of a stuttering lacunar 
syndrome in up to 30% of patients. Antiplatelet therapy should be instituted 
early on, blood pressure allowed to autoregulate, and glucose closely 
monitored. The choice of antiplatelet is mainly individual as all are equally 
effective for secondary ischemic stroke prevention, as discussed later in this 
section. Longer-term DAPT with aspirin 325 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg daily 
was not superior to aspirin therapy alone for reduction of recurrent lacunar 
stroke risk in the Secondary Prevention of Small Subcortical Strokes (SPS3) 
trial. Further, this combination promoted harm, leading to a significantly 
higher risk of bleeding and death. There is also no clear evidence that 
anticoagulation can improve clinical outcomes in lacunar stroke. Therefore, 
dual antiplatelet therapy and anticoagulation are not recommended for 
patients with lacunar stroke. 



Intracranial 
Atherosclerosis For patients with symptomatic severe intracranial 
stenosis, warfarin was also shown in a randomized trial to be no more 
effective than aspirin in preventing recurrent stroke. A more recent trial, the 
Stenting and Aggressive Medical Management for Preventing Recurrent 
Stroke in Intracranial Stenosis (SAMMPRIS) trial, randomized patients with 
severe (> 70%) symptomatic intracranial stenosis to intensive medical 
therapy alone versus intensive medical therapy and intracranial stenting with 
the Wingspan device. All patients received aspirin 325 mg daily and 
clopidogrel 75 mg daily for 90 days. Intensive medical therapy consisted of 
management of primary and secondary risk factors, aggressive blood 
pressure control, and intensive lipid lowering (target LCL-C < 70 mg/dL). 
The trial was stopped prematurely as the rate of stroke or death was 
significantly higher in the stenting group as compared to the patients 
receiving medical management only. This has led to widespread adoption of 
the medical management practices implemented in SAMMPRIS (DAPT, 
high-dose statins, tight blood pressure control, and healthy lifestyle and 
dietary habits for secondary stroke prevention in patients with symptomatic 
ICAD). 


Cryptogenic 
Embolism In cryptogenic embolism, debate exists as to the efficacy 
of anticoagulant therapy. Aspirin or other antiplatelet agents have been 
prescribed in lieu of anticoagulant therapy, but their efficacy also has not 
been proven by randomized clinical trials. Stroke and TIA subtypes were not 
identified in those studies in which aspirin was compared to placebo or to 
another antiplatelet agent for the secondary prevention of recurrent stroke or 
TIA after a previous minor primary stroke or TIA. One study in which the 
primary and secondary stroke subtypes were accurately identified was 
WARSS, which compared the efficacy of warfarin to aspirin in secondary 
stroke prevention. When all the stroke subtypes were combined, there was no 
difference in the risk of stroke with warfarin compared to aspirin. When the 
data for primary individual stroke subtypes were analyzed in terms of 
secondary stroke prevention, there was a trend in favor of anticoagulant 
therapy for patients with cryptogenic embolism. More recently, ESUS has 
become a popular term denoting patients in whom there is a strong suspicion 
for an underlying embolic source, but without a definite diagnosis after a 
standard stroke work-up. Two large-scale randomized clinical trials 
investigated the benefits of utilizing anticoagulation with NOACs versus 
standard antiplatelet management among ESUS patients. The Rivaroxaban 



Versus Aspirin in Secondary Prevention of Stroke and Prevention of 
Systemic Embolism in Patients with Recent Embolic Stroke of Undetermined 
Source (NAVIGATE ESUS) enrolled 7213 participants and randomized half 
of them to receive the intervention with rivaroxaban 15 mg PO daily and the 
other half to standard of care aspirin daily. While rivaroxaban was not 
associated with any benefit in the rate of occurrence of primary outcome 
(recurrent ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke or systemic embolism), the rate of 
major bleeding, life-threatening bleeding, and hemorrhagic stroke was higher 
among patients receiving the study medication versus the standard of care. 
Similarly, another trial compared the efficacy of dabigatran against aspirin in 
patients with ESUS and found no benefit in reduction in the rate of recurrent 
stroke (ischemic or hemorrhagic), while increasing the risk of bleeding 
complications. Because of these two trials, routine anticoagulation among 
patients with ESUS is not recommended. 


Giant 
Cell 
Arteritis 
(GCA) and 
Vasculitis Immunosuppression is the mainstay 
treatment for patients with tissue diagnosis of GCA or vasculitis. Maintaining 
a high index of suspicion is critical in the diagnosis of GCA, as early 
institution of glucocorticoids has been shown to minimize disability and to 
reduce the recurrence of flare ups in this condition. Long-term steroid 
therapy is usually pursued, with the introduction or other immunomodulatory 
medications such as tocilizumab, an IL-6 inhibitor to minimize recurrence of 
neurological and/or ophthalmological symptoms. The duration of 
immunosuppression is usually determined in a multidisciplinary setting with 
consensus from the treating neurologists, rheumatologists, and 
ophthalmologists in the context of patient’s comorbidities that influence the 
risks versus benefits of such long-term immunosuppression. The role of 
antiplatelet therapy is not well studied and again is usually determined based 
on individual risks versus benefits of such therapy. 


Management ofmalignant cerebral 
infarction Hemicraniectomy may be considered 
when progressive cerebral edema in the nondominant hemisphere becomes 
severe enough to compromise cerebral perfusion or cause brain herniation. 
This operation can prevent herniation and death by relieving intracranial 
pressure (ICP) but is unlikely to restore significant neurologic function 
because it is typically performed in the setting of extensive brain infarction. 
A pooled analysis of three small trials confirms that hemicraniectomy 
prevents severe dependency or death in patients younger than 60 years. 
Among patients 61 years or older with a malignant middle cerebral artery 



infarction, hemicraniectomy increased survival without severe disability. 
However, most survivors required assistance with most bodily needs. 


In cerebellar ischemic strokes larger than 2 to 3 cm in diameter, 
decompressive posterior fossa craniectomy may also be performed if the 
patient shows signs of clinical deterioration, to avoid brain stem 
compression and upward herniation. 


Long-term Preventive Strategies 
Preventive 
strategies 
forcontrolling 
primaryrisk 
factors Treatment of hypertension is, 
by far, the most important aspect of risk factor control. Achieving and 
maintaining blood pressure treatment targets are probably more important 
than class effects of the drugs. Among other recommendations for a healthy 
cardiovascular health, AHA/ASA strongly encourages people to aim 


achieving optimal targets in seven metrics that compose Life’s Simple 7 as 
follows: (1) no smoking or quitting smoking for > 12 months; (2) BMI < 25 
kg/m2; (3) physical activity of at least 150 min/week of moderate activity or 


at least 75 min/week of vigorous activity or at least 150 min/week of 
moderate and vigorous activity; (4) diet that includes (a) more than 4.5 
cups/day of fruits and vegetables, (b) more than 2 servings/week of fish, (c) 
more than 3 servings/day or whole grains, (d) no more than 36 oz/week of 
sugar-sweetened beverages, and (e) 1500 mg/day of sodium; (5) blood 
pressure < 120/80 mm Hg, (6) total cholesterol < 200 mg/dL; and (7) fasting 
plasma glucose < 100 mg/dL. Following the Third Report of the National 
Cholesterol Education Program Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and 
Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (ATP III) guidelines for 
prevention of MI, the primary goal is lowering the low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL). Risk factor adjustments including diet, exercise, weight reduction, 
cessation of smoking, and diabetes management are all important first steps. 
Hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors 
(“statins”) are associated with reduction in the risk of stroke, as well as 
reduction in the risk of MI. The Stroke Prevention with Atorvastatin to 
Reduce Cholesterol Levels (SPARCL) trial showed that, among patients with 
large-vessel atherothrombotic or lacunar stroke subtypes and LDL greater 
than 100 mg/dL, high-dose atorvastatin (80 mg every day) was superior to 
placebo in reducing subsequent stroke. Recently, the Treat Stroke to Target 
(TST) trial established the benefit of intensive treatment to achieve serum 
LDL < 70 mg/dL among patients who have had a recent stroke or a TIA and 



also have evidence of atherosclerotic disease (intracranial/extracranial 
atherosclerotic stenosis, history of coronary artery disease, or aortic arch 
atheroma) in preventing a composite primary outcome consisting of recurrent 
ischemic stroke, MI, new symptoms leading to urgent coronary or carotid 
revascularization, or death from cardiovascular causes. 


Stroke 
recovery Patients with stroke-related disability should be evaluated by 
specialists in physical therapy, occupational therapy, or speech therapy as 
appropriate. A substantial number of patients may benefit from inpatient 
rehabilitation following their acute hospital stay. There is evidence from 
observational studies that patients treated in dedicated stroke units, with 
experienced physician, nursing and rehabilitation staff, have better outcomes 
than those treated in general medical or surgical wards. 


Stroke recovery may require 6 months to a year, or even longer, because 
of the slow nature of neuroplastic changes following brain injury. Late 
complications of stroke include spasticity, contracture, pressure ulcers, 
shoulder joint dislocation, and depression. The injection of botulinum toxin 
in affected muscles has been shown to improve symptoms of stroke-related 
spasticity. Earlier, a recovery trial had shown that early use of fluoxetine 
with physical therapy enhanced motor recovery in stroke patients with 
moderate-to-severe deficits, independent of the drug’s effect on mood; 
however, three recently concluded trials did not show the benefit of oral 
fluoxetine on functional outcome after stroke. However, it did show an 
increased risk of bone fractures among patients receiving fluoxetine and is as 
such not recommended routinely for indications other than mood disorders 
among stroke survivors. 


INTRACRANIAL HEMORRHAGE 


Intracranial hemorrhages are classified according to the site of origin. The 
diagnosis, treatment, and secondary prevention of intracranial hemorrhage 
depend on the assessment of the underlying specific pathophysiology, 
analogous to the way in which ischemic stroke diagnosis and treatment 
depend on identifying the ischemic stroke subtype. There are four locations 
of origin: intracerebral, subarachnoid, subdural, and epidural. Subdural and 
epidural hemorrhages are predominantly traumatic and are not considered a 
form of hemorrhagic stroke. This section will therefore be concerned with 
ICH and SAH. Hemorrhagic stroke accounts for approximately 15% of all 



strokes. ICH may be further divided by location into deep ICH (arising in the 
deep hemispheric portions of the brain, including the basal ganglia, thalamus, 
brain stem, and cerebellum) and lobar ICH (arising in the cortex or at the 
junction of the cortex and the white matter). Hypertension is the most 
common cause of spontaneous ICH, while CAA is the most common cause of 
spontaneous lobar ICH in the older adults. 


Intracerebral Hemorrhage 
Deephemispheric 
hemorrhage Hypertension is by far the major cause of 
hemorrhage in deep brain locations. The most common sites are the putamen, 
thalamus, pons, and cerebellum. A penetrating artery arising from one of the 
major intracranial arteries (middle cerebral stem or M1 segment, basilar 
artery, or PCA) is generally the source of the hemorrhage. These same 
vessels are also frequently affected by lipohyalinosis, and when occlusion 
occurs rather than rupture, lacunar infarction is the outcome. 


Clinical Presentation 


Each of the four sites of deep ICH produces a characteristic clinical 
syndrome. Inputaminal hemorrhage, there is contralateral hemiplegia and 
conjugate deviation of the eyes toward the hemorrhage side. Stupor is 
evident at the onset in most cases. Thalamic hemorrhage typically presents 
with contralateral sensory loss and gaze abnormalities. Involvement of the 
internal capsule results in contralateral hemiparesis. Aphasia can occur in 
left thalamic ICH and visuospatial abnormalities can occur in right thalamic 
ICH. Involvement of the reticular activating system results in reduced 
consciousness and sleepiness. Pontine hemorrhage produces coma, 
quadriplegia, decerebrate rigidity, impairment of horizontal eye movements, 
and pinpoint pupils. Cerebellar hemorrhage typically presents with 
headache, vertigo, nausea, vomiting, and instability of gait. Facial weakness 
and gaze palsies can also occur. Coma may result from brain stem 
compression or upward or downward herniation of cerebellar structures. 


Lobarhemorrhage Lobar hemorrhages occur spontaneously in the supratentorial 
white matter and cerebral cortex of all lobes of the brain. The manifestations 
are dependent on the area involved. Frontal hemorrhages may present with 
contralateral hemiparesis, expressive aphasia, and gaze deviation toward the 
hemorrhage. Parietal hemorrhages may result in contralateral neglect and 
sensory loss, while occipital hemorrhages could present with contralateral 



homonymous hemianopia. Temporal hemorrhages of the dominant hemisphere 
may present with receptive aphasia. Headache is sometimes present and may 
be most severe near the location of the hemorrhage. If the hemorrhage is 
large, then depressed consciousness may be present. The symptoms usually 
evolve over minutes or hours, in contrast to embolic ischemic stroke where 
the onset of symptoms is abrupt. A precise cause of lobar ICH is found in a 
significant number of cases: CAA and vascular malformations are the most 
common; metastatic disease is less frequent, but well known. A proportion of 
lobar ICH is likely caused by hypertension. Lobar ICH is more readily 
accessible for surgical evacuation because of its superficial location. A 
subgroup analysis of the Surgical Trial for Intracerebral Hemorrhage 
(STICH) showed a benefit for surgery, compared to initial conservative 
management, for ICH less than 1 cm from the cortical surface. 


CAA is a common cause of both single and recurrent lobar hemorrhages 
in the older population and is diagnosed conclusively only by postmortem 
demonstration of amyloid in the media of cortical and leptomeningeal 
arterioles and capillaries. Sporadic amyloid angiopathy is caused by the 
deposition of β-amyloid only in the cerebral arteries, without systemic 
amyloidosis. But the clinical history of repeated supratentorial lobar 
hemorrhages and the demonstration of small, 1- to 2-mm areas of 
hypointensity on MRI susceptibility-weighted sequences, indicative of prior 
small asymptomatic hemorrhages (cerebral microbleeds), strongly suggest 
the diagnosis. These small, silent hemorrhages may be the cause of recurrent 
focal symptoms sometimes seen in these patients. A clinical-pathologic 
correlation study suggests that CAA is the cause of approximately 70% of 
primary lobar ICH in persons older than 55 years. Other than avoidance of 
antithrombotic medications, treatment options remain elusive. There is a high 
recurrence rate of 10% to 14% per year in sporadic lobar ICH, mostly 
caused by CAA, which is significantly higher than the recurrence rate of 2% 
to 4% per year observed in survivors of deep ICH. Careful control of 
associated hypertension, if present, seems prudent. 


A small number of cases are associated with vascular or perivascular 
inflammation that frequently responds to a pulse of steroids, although late 
relapses may occur. Inflammatory CAA typically presents with cognitive 
impairment, seizure, or focal neurologic signs rather than hemorrhagic stroke. 
Asymmetric white and gray matter hyperintensities, often with small silent 



hemorrhages on susceptibility sequence, are observed on MRI. Biopsy is 
usually indicated to exclude other causes of vasculitis. 


Lobar 
Hemorrhages 
Caused 
by 
Metastatic 
Disease Cerebral metastases, particularly 
malignant melanoma, may give rise to cerebral hemorrhage. Usually, the 
metastases are multiple and can easily be demonstrated by contrast MRI or 
CT scans. 


Evaluation of ICH: Noncontrast head CT scan has excellent sensitivity 
for ICH and is the initial modality of choice in ICH diagnosis. There are no 
clinical signs or symptoms specific for ischemic stroke compared to 
hemorrhagic stroke, making CT mandatory in all patients presenting with 
potential stroke. Vessel imaging with CTA or MRA should be performed for 
the diagnosis of cerebral aneurysm or vascular malformation. Venous 
imaging with CT venography (CTV) or MR venography (MRV) should be 
performed if concern for venous sinus thrombosis exists. Catheter 
angiography should be performed if suspicion remains high for vascular 
abnormality despite negative CTA or MRA. Contrast-enhanced CT or MRI 
should be performed when suspicion of underlying mass lesion exists. A 
“spot sign” on CTA is the finding of contrast extravasation into a hematoma 
and is associated with hemorrhage expansion and poor outcome. MRI also 
has excellent sensitivity for detecting ICH. Hemorrhage on special T2weighted 
sequences such as gradient recalled echo (GRE) or susceptibilityweighted 
imaging (SWI) appears as hypointensity or low signal compared to 
surrounding brain. Cerebral microbleeds are small areas of hypointensity that 
represent chronic small hemorrhage. Their location often points to an 
underlying etiology with deep microbleeds mainly due to hypertension and 
lobar microbleeds due to CAA. Older patients with a history of hypertension 
and hemorrhage in a typical location do not need angiographic assessment. In 
contrast, younger patients and those with an atypical-appearing hemorrhage 
should have angiography. When hemorrhages occur in atypical locations or in 
the absence of a history of hypertension, a follow-up MRI brain scan with 
and without contrast is performed in up to 3 months, following ICH 
resorption, to screen for an underlying lesion such as a vascular 
malformation or tumor. Acute laboratory assessment should include platelet 
count, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, and INR to exclude 
bleeding diathesis. An ESR, CRP, and blood cultures should be considered 
in patients at risk for septic embolism from bacterial endocarditis. The 
history, physical examination, and imaging should exclude secondary causes 



of hemorrhage such as coagulopathy, brain tumor, aneurysm rupture, and 
hemorrhagic transformation of ischemic infarction. 


The size and location of the hematoma determine the treatment and 
prognosis. Supratentorial hematomas greater than 5 cm in diameter have a 
poor prognosis. Infratentorial hematomas greater than 3 cm in size are 
generally fatal if they are in the pons. Other factors associated with poor 
prognosis are the presence of intraventricular blood and worse level of 
consciousness at presentation. 


Treatment of ICH: All patients with ICH should be initially managed in 
an intensive care unit. General supportive care should be provided. 
Eunatremia, normoglycemia, and normothermia are mainstays of treatment. 
Seizures may occur and should be treated with anticonvulsant medications 
when they occur. Seizure prophylaxis is generally not recommended. Patients 
taking warfarin at the time of ICH must have the INR aggressively corrected 
emergently with vitamin K and vitamin K–dependent factors and the warfarin 
discontinued. Patients with ICH on antiplatelet medications should have 
these antiplatelet medications discontinued. A randomized clinical trial 
evaluated the utility of platelet transfusion in patients with spontaneous 
intracranial hemorrhage and found empiric platelet transfusion to be 
associated with a higher rate of death or dependence at 3 months as 
compared to standard of care and is currently not recommended routinely 
unless there is a neurosurgical procedure planned. Prompt anticoagulation 
reversal may be useful in reducing hematoma expansion and subsequent 
morbidity/mortality but this often comes at a cost of inadvertent procoagulant 
effects of the anticoagulant reversal agent that may contribute to thrombotic 
complications. For warfarin, IV vitamin K is used along with fresh frozen 
plasma/cryoprecipitate or prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC). NOACspecific 
reversal agents (idarucizumab for dabigatran and andexanet alpha 
for direct thrombin inhibitors) are currently not widely available on a routine 
basis; therefore, PCC is often used in that scenario. The relationship between 
blood pressure and outcomes after ICH is complex. Although blood pressure 
reduction is crucial in prevention of hematoma expansion, the exact levels of 
blood pressure reduction have yet to be defined. Current guidelines state that 
it is likely safe to reduce SBP to 140 mm Hg acutely when the presenting 
SBP is between 150 and 220 mm Hg. For patients presenting with SBP > 220 
mm Hg, aggressive reduction of blood pressure with continuous intravenous 
infusion of antihypertensive medication and frequent blood pressure 



monitoring to maintain SBP around 140 mm Hg to 160 mm Hg is 
recommended. In clinical trials, a more sudden reduction of blood pressure 
to achieve SBP < 140 mm Hg was associated with increased renal 
complications and was not clearly associated with any benefit in overall 
outcomes. Elevated ICP can result either from hematoma or associated 
cerebral edema. Patients with Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) less than or equal 
to 8, evidence of transtentorial herniation or hydrocephalus, or significant 
intraventricular hemorrhage should have ICP monitoring and treatment. 
Osmotic agents such as mannitol or hypertonic saline are frequently used to 
lower ICP. Ventriculostomy with an external ventricular drain is often used in 
obstructive or communicating hydrocephalus. 


The surgical indications for ICH depend mainly on the location of the 
ICH. Patients with cerebellar hemorrhages greater than 3 cm and neurologic 
deterioration or brain stem compression and/or hydrocephalus should have 
early hematoma evacuation. For other locations, surgical evacuation is 
controversial. The STICH trial failed to find a benefit for surgical evacuation 
over medical management. In STICH, patients with ICH less than 1 cm from 
the cortical surface had a trend toward favorable outcome with early surgery. 
Surgical evacuation for deep ICH accompanied by decreasing level of 
consciousness caused by increasing mass effect is also considered. Less 
invasive surgical methods are currently being developed and could be used 
widely in the future. 


Vascularmalformations Increasingly recognized with advances in neuroimaging 
techniques, vascular malformations are classified into four types: venous 
malformations, capillary telangiectasias, arteriovenous malformations 
(AVMs), and cavernous malformations or angioma. Vascular malformations 
may cause hemorrhage in either deep or lobar locations. 


The management of patients with vascular malformations is best 
accomplished by an experienced team comprised of neurosurgeons and 
physicians who can consider both surgical and endovascular approaches, 
sometimes in combination. Radiosurgical obliteration may also be an option 
in some cases (ie, deep, inaccessible lesions associated with repeated 
hemorrhages or progressive neurologic deficits). Each case requires a unique 
approach that takes into account the extent and location of the vascular 
malformation, and the feasibility and safety of the various therapeutic 
approaches. 



Subarachnoid Hemorrhage 


The most common cause of atraumatic SAH is rupture of an aneurysm. Other 
less-common causes include blood dyscrasia or leukemia, tumors (such as 
ependymoma or meningioma, glioblastoma, renal cell, or metastasis), 
vascular malformation, or, rarely, venous sinus disease or meningitis. 


Ruptured aneurysms occur at the branch points of arteries at the base of 
the brain and following rupture, give rise to SAH, or sometimes ICH. 
Histologic examination shows interruption of the internal elastic lamina with 
an aneurysmal outpouching that appears like a berry. Although usually single, 
aneurysms can be multiple in 15% to 20% of cases. The most common sites 
are the anterior communicating artery, junction of the posterior 
communicating artery with the ICA, middle cerebral stem bifurcation, top of 
the basilar artery, origin of the major branches of the basilar artery, and at the 
origin of PICA. Intracranial aneurysms can be associated with coarctation of 
the aorta and are more common in autosomal domination polycystic kidney 
disease. 


Prodromal symptoms and signs, prior to rupture occur in as many as a 
third of cases. These symptoms may include headache, diplopia, or blurred 
vision. Pinpoint pain behind the eye with or without a third nerve palsy is the 
most common and indicates the presence of an aneurysm at the posterior 
communicating artery–ICA junction. It represents a medical emergency. 
Juxtaclinoid aneurysms compress the optic nerve, leading to amblyopia. 
Supraclinoid aneurysms can be confused with suprasellar tumors, sometimes 
producing a hypothalamic syndrome. Aneurysms in the vertebrobasilar 
system can produce occipital headaches and cerebellar or long-tract signs as 
well as cranial nerve deficits. 


The most common symptom of aneurysmal rupture is a sudden, severe 
headache, often characterized as the “worst headache of life.” Other 
symptoms may include loss of consciousness, nausea and vomiting, and 
meningismus. Focal neurologic signs occur infrequently. Focal signs occur 
when the hemorrhage ruptures into the brain parenchyma and help in 
localization of the rupture site. For example, anterior communicating artery 
aneurysmal rupture produces a slowed or abulic state with contralateral 
weakness of the leg while middle cerebral artery aneurysm rupture produces 
contralateral hemiparesis and aphasia if the dominant hemisphere is 
involved. 



Evaluation of SAH: A noncontrast head CT is the initial modality of 
choice and has excellent sensitivity for SAH. At our institution a CTA of the 
head, to look for a cerebral aneurysm, is also performed at the time of the 
noncontrast head CT. If the head CT is negative for SAH, but high suspicion 
remains, a lumbar puncture (LP) must be performed. The main findings 
consistent with SAH on the LP are elevated red blood cell count, 
xanthochromia, and elevated opening pressure. 


Delayed clinical syndromes mainly consist of re-rupture syndromes, 
hydrocephalus, and the syndromes resulting from cerebral vasospasm. Rerupture 
is most frequent during the first 72 hours after the initial rupture. 
Early surgical or endovascular intervention now precludes many re-ruptures. 
Fever (≥ 38°C) in the absence of a discernible infective etiology is common 
in SAH, and in some instances, may be confused with florid meningitis. 
Hydrocephalus may be acute in the first day or two after the SAH and 
requires ventricular drainage. Delayed hydrocephalus presents several days 
to weeks after the SAH and may require ventriculoperitoneal shunting. 
Worsening stupor is a sign of both early and delayed hydrocephalus. 
Cerebral vasospasm usually develops between days 4 and 14 following the 
SAH. Its location and severity have been related to the extent and location of 
the subarachnoid blood, with thick clot typically present around the artery 
developing spasm. In 30% of cases, the spasm is severe enough to give rise 
to ischemic symptoms and infarction may ensue. In middle cerebral artery 
stem vasospasm, the resulting infarction may cause devastating cerebral 
edema. The extent and location of blood in the basal cisterns postoperatively 
may represent patients likely to have severe vasospasm to develop signs of 
ischemia or infarction. 


Management of the patient with SAH from a ruptured berry aneurysm 
should focus on (1) medical stabilization, with aggressive treatment of 
elevated blood pressure and good supportive neurocritical care, (2) early 
surgical clipping or endovascular coiling in non-moribund patients to prevent 
re-re-rupture, and (3) prevention and treatment of delayed ischemia caused 
by vasospasm. The International Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial (ISAT) 
showed that, for aneurysms equally accessible for surgical clipping or 
endovascular treatment with detachable coils, the endovascular strategy was 
associated with less death or dependency at 1 year. Volume expansion and 
blood pressure elevation together with calcium channel blockers are often 
used to prevent symptomatic ischemia from vasospasm. Oral nimodipine, 60 



mg given every 4 hours, has been shown in multiple clinical trials to reduce 
mortality and the incidence of delayed ischemia. For refractory cases local 
intra-arterial infusion of vasodilators such as nicardipine, or angioplasty of 
the affected arteries, may alleviate arterial stenosis caused by vasospasm. 


Given the above complications and expertise necessary to perform highly 
technical neurosurgical and endovascular approaches to obliterate 
aneurysms, the patient should be managed at a center capable of carrying out 
these maneuvers. 


PALLIATIVE CARE 


Palliative care is an approach that optimizes quality of life, comfort, and 
family-centered care by anticipating, preventing, and treating suffering. It 
involves addressing physical, intellectual, emotional, social, and spiritual 
needs of the patients and their loved ones. Stroke is associated with 
significant morbidity and mortality, especially in older adults. Large 
ischemic strokes, catastrophic ICHs and SAHs carry a significant mortality 
and disability in older patients and almost half of the deaths occur in an 
inpatient setting (acute care hospital or rehabilitation facilities). Primary 
palliative care is administered by the patient’s primary treatment team that 
may consist of neurologists, hospital medicine specialists, physical and 
rehabilitation medicine specialists, speech therapists, etc. Pain is a 
significant symptom among poststroke patients and should be adequately 
addressed to enhance patients’ well-being and neurological recovery. Some 
of the common pain syndromes include central poststroke pain, hemiplegic 
shoulder pain, and painful spasticity. While amitriptyline for relief of pain is 
often the drug-of-choice in younger patients, caution should be exercised 
when prescribing this medication to older adults because of its side effects, 
and often nortriptyline is the preferred treatment. For patients with 
hemiplegic shoulder pain, heat, ice, soft tissue massage, or intra-articular 
steroid injections, intramuscular botox injections, etc. are considered 
reasonable treatment choices. Other comorbidities such as fatigue, urinary 
incontinence, sleep-disordered breathing, depression, and anxiety should be 
promptly identified and addressed. 


An essential part of establishing goals of care for a stroke patient is to 
obtain a thorough understanding of the aspects of functional recovery that are 
crucial to the individual patient—for example, ability to ambulate, ability to 
communicate, etc. A lot of patients express their strong desire to refrain from 



pursuing any lifesaving treatments if their current medical condition severely 
limits the likelihood of returning to their functional baseline in some of these 
aspects. Ideally, these goals of care discussions especially in the elderly 
should begin at the planning stage of administering acute stroke treatments, as 
often these treatments necessitate coadministration of other life-sustaining 
strategies such as mechanical ventilation, further requiring a variable amount 
of stay in a critical care unit as patients recover from their acute illness. As 
such, the discussions around risks versus benefits of acute stroke treatments 
should include a clear explanation of risks versus benefits of these additional 
life-sustaining measures that are necessary to obtain the maximum benefit 
from stroke treatment. While accurate prognostication regarding stroke 
recovery is prone to several uncertainties, a careful assessment of individual 
patient’s comorbidities, size of stroke, and eloquence of the affected brain 
tissue may allow for a more informed shared decision-making between the 
patients/families and the clinical teams. A sizable proportion of stroke 
patients suffer from dysphagia requiring artificial nutrition and hydration 
(ANH) through a nasogastric tube or PEG. In patients who cannot swallow 
safely, it is reasonable to offer a trial of a nasogastric tube for up to 2 to 3 
weeks before considering a PEG. During this trial period, aggressive speech 
therapy making every effort at establishing the true extent of patients’ 
swallowing capabilities should be made and reviewed with the patient/their 
family members. Finally, in patients who have suffered a severe degree of 
illness limiting their ability to achieve their desired outcome and wishing to 
pursue end-of-life or comfort measures, a multidisciplinary team approach in 
consultation with palliative care expertise should be promptly offered. 
Patients with a life expectancy of 6 months or less may be appropriate 
candidates for hospice. Depending on their health care needs, hospice care 
can be instituted in an inpatient setting or in appropriate context, even at 
home. Hospice care does not necessarily mean cessation of all medical 
treatments, but rather aims to offer comfort to the patient, prevent suffering, 
and focuses on the quality of life at the patient’s terminal stage of illness. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENT 


The authors utilized information contained in a similar chapter in the 7th 
edition of this textbook and wish to thank Erica Camargo, MD, PhD, MSC, 
Ming-Chieh Ding, MD, PhD, Eli Zimmerman, MD, and Scott Silverman, MD, 
for their contributions to that chapter. 



FURTHERREADING
Albers GW, Marks MP, Kemp S, et al. Thrombectomy for stroke at 6 to 16 
hours with selection by perfusion imaging. N Engl J Med. 
2018;378(8):708–718. 


Berkhemer OA, Fransen PSS, Beumer D, et al. A randomized trial of 
intraarterial treatment for acute ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med. 
2015;372:11–20. 


Brott T, Bogousslavsky J. Treatment of acute ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med. 
2000;343(10):710–722. 


Brott TG, Brown RD Jr, Meyer FB, Miller DA, Cloft HJ, Sullivan TM. 
Carotid revascularization for prevention of stroke: carotid 
endarterectomy and carotid artery stenting. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2004;79:1197–1208. 


Connolly ES, Rabinstein AA, Carhuapoma JR, et al. Guidelines for the 
management of aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: a guideline for 
healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American 
Stroke Association. Stroke. 2012;43(6):1711–1737. 


Goyal M, Demchuk AM, Menon BK, et al. Randomized assessment of rapid 
endovascular treatment of ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med. 
2015;372:1019–1030. 


Goyal M, Menon BK, van Zwam WH, et al. Endovascular thrombectomy 
after large-vessel ischaemic stroke: a meta-analysis of individual patient 
data from five randomised trials. Lancet. 2016;387(10029):1723–1731. 


Hemphill JC 3rd, Greenberg SM, Anderson CS, et al. Guidelines for the 
Management of Spontaneous Intracerebral Hemorrhage: A Guideline for 
Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2015;46(7):2032– 
2060. 


Kern R, Ringleb PA, Hacke W, Mas JL, Hennerici MG. Stenting for carotid 
artery stenosis. Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2007;3:212–220. 


Kleindorfer DO, Towfighi A, Chaturvedi S, et al. 2021 Guideline for the 
Prevention of Stroke in Patients With Stroke and Transient Ischemic 
Attack: A Guideline From the American Heart Association/American 
Stroke Association. Stroke. 2021;52(7):e364–e467. 


Nogueira RG, Jadhav AP, Haussen DC, et al. Thrombectomy 6 to 24 hours 
after stroke with a mismatch between deficit and infarct. N Engl J Med. 



2018;378(1):11–21. 


Powers WJ, Rabinstein AA, Ackerson T, et al. Guidelines for the Early 
Management of Patients With Acute Ischemic Stroke: 2019 Update to the 
2018 Guidelines for the Early Management of Acute Ischemic Stroke: A 
Guideline for Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2019;50(12):e344– 
e418. 



Chapter 


OtherNeurodegenerativeDisorders 


John 
Best, 
Howie Rosen, 
Victor 
Valcour, 
Bruce Miller 


Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disorder 
encountered by the practicing geriatrician; however, a sizable number of 
other neurodegenerative diseases will be seen in a typical practice, 
rendering a working knowledge of these disorders critical for clinicians. 
Furthermore, there is increasing evidence that with greater age, many 
individuals die with mixed pathology—with AD, vascular changes, 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), and Lewy body changes often 
seen in a single brain. This chapter provides an overview of the more 
common neurodegenerative disorders with emphasis on those that influence 
behavior and cognition early in the course. We begin by reviewing the 
clinical approach to neurodegenerative cognitive disorders and then review 
the clinical presentation, epidemiology, and examination findings of the more 
common neurodegenerative syndromes. We attempt to link clinical 
presentation to anatomy and neuropathology whenever possible. 


APPROACH 
TO 
THE EVALUATION 
OF 
COGNITIVE 
AND 
BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS 
IN 
ADULTS 


The evaluation of neurodegenerative disorders is multifaceted, requiring 
careful attention to the cognitive, behavioral, and motor history combined 
with a comprehensive neurologic examination aiming to identify the brain 
regions involved. Isolating anatomy in patients who present with slowly 
progressive neurodegenerative disorders greatly facilitates the determination 
of the correct diagnosis. 


Emphasis should be placed on the earliest presenting symptoms, whether 
cognitive, behavioral, or motor in origin. These early features may be critical 



to the identification of the pathologic substrate. As diseases progress, signs 
and symptoms merge between the different disorders, making diagnosis more 
difficult. An early history of repeated falls, for example, should warrant 
concern for progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), vascular dementia, or 
Parkinson disease. This finding is valuable when it is present early in the 
illness, although most dementias are associated with basal ganglia 
involvement later in their disease course, diminishing the value of falls for 
diagnosis in the later stages. Likewise, inappropriate behavior and 
disinhibition are commonly seen in patients with advanced dementia 
syndromes, regardless of disease etiology; however, when these findings are 
a prominent presenting feature in the relative absence of amnestic symptoms, 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD) should be considered more likely. 


LearningObjectives
■ 
Learnaboutthe 
epidemiology,commonclinicalpresentations,diagnosis,andtreatmentof non-
Alzheimer type 
of neurodegenerative 
diseases. 
■ 
Gainnew 
knowledge 
aboutrecentdiscoveries 
relatedtothe 
genetics,pathology,andpathobiology 
of commontau- andα-synucleopathies 
inolder adults. 
■ 
Learnaboutthe 
specific 
behavioralandnonbehavioralsymptoms,clinicalsigns,diagnostic 
criteria, 
andcommonneuroimaging,genetic,andlaboratorytests 
usedtodiagnose 
non-Alzheimer types 
of 
dementia. 
■ 
Understandthe 
scientific 
rationale,indications,andlimitations 
of currentlyavailable 
andemerging 
therapies 
for commonnon-Alzheimer type 
neurodegenerative 
diseases. 
KeyClinicalPoints
1. 
The evaluation of neurodegenerative disorders includes careful 
attention to the cognitive, behavioral, and motor symptoms along 
with a thorough neurologic examination. 
2. 
In older age, it becomes increasingly common for there to be 
more than one type of pathology causing a dementia syndrome. 
3. 
The characteristic features of Lewy body dementia include 
cognitive impairments with profound fluctuation, spontaneous 

parkinsonism, rapid eye movement (REM) behavior sleep 
disorder, and visual hallucinations. 


4. 
About 30% of patients with Parkinson disease develop dementia. 
In these patients, unlike Alzheimer disease (AD), the motor and 
other symptoms of Parkinson disease generally predate dementia 
by many years. 
5. 
The dominance of behavioral and personality changes in the 
absence of memory and perceptual symptoms is highly suggestive 
of the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia (FTD). 
6. 
History of falls and dysphagia with abnormalities in vertical gaze 
and preserved oculocephalic reflex is suggestive of a diagnosis of 
progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). 
Cognitive histories should be comprehensive and must include evaluation 
of memory, language, visuospatial function, executive functioning, behavior, 
and attention (Table 63-1). The comprehensive history should probe for 
autonomic symptoms and sleep patterns, with emphasis on symptoms 
associated with disorders of REM sleep behavior and sleep apneas. 


TABLE 63-1■ASSESSMENT OF MAJOR COGNITIVE DOMAINSIN NEURODEGENERATIVE DISORDERS

The assessment of behavioral symptoms can be particularly helpful and 
sometimes critical in non-Alzheimer neurodegenerative disorders. 
Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) is the most common 
cause of dementia in patients younger than age 60. Behavioral symptoms or 
personality change are commonly the presenting symptoms of this disorder 
(see discussion later in this chapter). Recent research criteria for bvFTD 
require three of the following six symptoms to meet “possible” criteria: early 
disinhibition, early apathy, early loss of sympathy or empathy for others, 
early repetitive motor behaviors, early hyperorality, and deficits in frontal 
executive function with relative sparing of visuospatial abilities. For 
probable bvFTD, in addition to meeting the “possible” criteria just listed, 
frontotemporal atrophy or the presence of a known causative mutation is 
required. The emergence of predominant behavior and personality changes in 
the absence of episodic memory and perceptual complaints localizes disease 
to the frontal or anterior temporal lobes, although presence of memory loss 
does not rule out bvFTD. 


The neurologic examination is a critical component to the assessment of 
neurodegenerative disorders and typically confirms the clinical impression 
obtained from the history. The motor examination identifies both pyramidal 
and extrapyramidal signs as well as features characteristic of FTD, dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), and PSP. 
Examination of cranial nerves includes an assessment of eye movements and 



range of gaze. Abnormalities in vertical gaze, either reduced amplitude or 
complete palsy, with a preserved oculocephalic reflex are a characteristic 
finding in PSP. Horizontal gaze abnormalities are more typical of CBD. 
Abnormalities in saccadic eye movements can be seen in several 
neurodegenerative disorders ranging from AD to PSP. Saccadic movements 
are tested by asking the patient to focus on an object in front of them (such as 
a pen tip held by the examiner) then to quickly refocus on an item in their 
peripheral field (such as the examiner’s finger) while the examiner watches 
carefully for saccadic latency (delay in initiation of movement), incomplete 
saccades (gaze palsy), and interrupted or jerky saccadic movement. 
Saccades should be tested in all four directions. The examiner should test 
ocular pursuit by having the patient track an object, such as the examiner’s 
finger, in both horizontal and vertical directions. 


The examination should probe for changes in cognition, behavior, and 
movement with emphasis upon the earliest abnormalities. It is important to 
realize that early symptoms reflect where the illness began, and this is 
usually helpful in the determination of disease etiology. Confirmatory 
imaging and laboratory work and standard laboratory tests to exclude 
treatable etiologies of cognitive impairment can then be completed (Table 
63-2). 


TABLE 63-2■SOME LABORATORY TESTS COMMONLY USEDIN THE EVALUATION OF COGNITIVE DISORDERS

DISORDERS 
ASSOCIATED 
WITH 
α-SYNUCLEIN 
DEPOSITION 


Dementia With Lewy Bodies 


The precise role of α-synuclein in health and disease is not fully understood. 
High concentrations of α-synuclein in synaptic regions suggest a role in 
synaptic plasticity. In DLB, α-synuclein accumulates with the brain stem, 
basal ganglia, and cortex, resulting in a progressive neurodegenerative 
cognitive, behavioral, and motor disorder. The prevalence of DLB is still 
uncertain, and the coassociation of Lewy body and AD pathology is 
extremely common in aging dementia populations. Indeed, even with 
classical AD associated with apolipoprotein E4 genotype, more than 50% of 
subjects show Lewy bodies, and genetic disorders that predispose to Lewy 
bodies often show the coassociation of Aβ-42. Based on autopsy studies, 
DLB, especially cooccurring DLB and AD, is often underdiagnosed during 
life. 


The reported mean onset of disease is 75 years with a range from 50 to 
80 years, and there is a slight predominance of DLB in men compared to 
women. The clinical and pathologic overlap between DLB and AD and with 
Parkinson disease dementia (PDD) is well recognized, resulting in some 
diagnostic challenges. Accurate diagnosis has clinical implications, as 
patients with DLB compared to AD tend to have a robust response to 
cholinesterase inhibitors, and patients with DLB often have sensitivity to 
neuroleptic medications. 


The core features of DLB are cognitive impairment with profound 
fluctuations in attention and cognition, spontaneous parkinsonism, REM 
behavior sleep disorder (the physical enactment of dreams), and recurrent 
well-formed visual hallucinations. The typical neuropsychological profile 
differs somewhat from that of AD. DLB often involves early executive 
dysfunction and, when present, more severe visuospatial dysfunction. In DLB 
there is typically better performance on episodic memory tasks, and 
recognition memory when compared to AD patients. Invariably, memory 
becomes impaired over time in both disorders. Combined cortical and 
subcortical deficits are common, and deficits in attention are a core feature 
of the disease. 


The degree of cognitive fluctuation can be so profound as to affect Mini 
Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores up to 50% from day-to-day, and 



