patient’s treating physician. In moderate-to-later stages of the disease course, 
patients will become dependent for basic daily activities such as eating, 
bathing, and grooming, and may also display challenging behaviors like 
wandering or agitation. Maintaining a regular, predictable schedule that 
includes some form of activity, ensuring good nighttime sleep, and assessing 
for other causes of agitation (eg, infection; pain) can be helpful in these 
situations. Occasionally, medications can be prescribed to combat agitation 
or aggression, though certain types of medications (eg, antipsychotics, 
sedatives) often have unwanted side effects in older adults or those with 
dementia, so these decisions need to be made judiciously. Patients with latestage 
disease often experience difficulties with swallowing, communication, 
and/or bladder and bowel control and need round-the-clock-care. In 
moderate to late stage disease, many families find they need to rely on hired 
caregivers or consider an assisted living facility for assistance in managing 
their loved ones’ needs. Caregiver support and education is essential at all 
stages of the disease. 


Lewy Body Disorders 


Lewy body dementia (LBD) encompasses both DLB and PDD. The primary 
neuropathologic feature in both diseases is the accumulation of cortical Lewy 
bodies, resulting from abnormal aggregation of α-synuclein. However, 
additional pathologic features, including accumulation of tau protein, 
concurrent vascular and/or AD pathology, neurotransmitter abnormalities, 
and frontostriatal projections that have been disrupted by loss of 
dopaminergic neurons, can all contribute to the cognitive decline associated 
with these diseases. 


Although PD and DLB have historically been considered related but 
separate clinical entities, many of the neuropathologic, clinical, cognitive, 
and psychiatric characteristics of the two diseases have considerable 
overlap. Both are associated with cognitive fluctuations, visual 
hallucinations, psychiatric symptoms, and REM sleep behavior disorder in 
the context of PD motor symptoms, and thus recent debates have examined 
whether PD, PDD, and DLB should be placed along a clinical continuum 
representing the same underlying pathology. Currently, the differential 
diagnosis is based on the timing of the onset of the cognitive symptoms. A 
patient with PD who develops dementia after 1 year of well-established 
motor symptoms is classified as “PDD,” while a patient with motor 



symptoms occurring after the onset of dementia (or within one year of motor 


symptom onset) is classified as “DLB.” 
Parkinsondisease Diagnosis of PD according to the United Kingdom Parkinson 
Disease Society Brain Bank clinical diagnostic criteria requires specific 
motor symptoms, including bradykinesia and at least one of the following: 
muscular rigidity, rest tremor, and/or postural instability. Although motor 
symptoms have long been considered the defining feature of PD, a wide 
range of associated nonmotor symptoms, such as impaired sleep patterns, 
psychiatric symptoms, gastrointestinal dysfunction, and cognitive impairment, 
are increasingly recognized as having substantial impact on functional 
abilities and quality of life for these patients. Of these nonmotor symptoms, 
cognitive dysfunction is a substantial concern, with upwards of 80% of 
patients who live for 20 years or more with PD expected to develop PDD 
over the course of the disease. Current Movement Disorder Society task 
force recommended consensus diagnostic criteria for PDD include (1) a 
diagnosis of PD, (2) PD symptoms developed prior to the onset of dementia, 


(3)impaired global cognition (eg, on MMSE or MoCA), (4) cognitive 
impairment severe enough to impair activities of daily living, and (5) 
impairments in more than one cognitive domain on detailed neurocognitive 
testing. Additional supportive symptoms may include psychiatric symptoms 
(eg, depression, apathy, delusions) or impaired sleep. Even among patients 
without dementia, however, the rate of concurrent cognitive impairment can 
be quite high. PD-mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI), similar to MCI due 
to AD, is characterized by subjective cognitive decline (noted by the patient, 
collateral, or clinician), objective impairments on neuropsychological 
assessment, and absence of functional impairment sufficient to significantly 
interfere with functional independence in the presence of clinically verified 
PD. PD-MCI is common, with overall prevalence estimates approximately 
30% to 40%. Cognitive deficits often emerge early during the course of the 
disease, with 10% to 30% of newly diagnosed patients with PD identified 
with cognitive impairment. However, there is substantial variability in the 
nature and course of cognitive symptoms in PD, with many patients 
maintaining a stable or fluctuating course and others demonstrating more 
rapid decline (Figure 57-3). Several variables associated with more rapid 
cognitive decline have been identified, including age, disease duration, sex, 
and specific genetic mutations. 

FIGURE 57-3. 
Change 
incognitive 
diagnostic 
status 
over time 
ina 
multi-site 
Parkinsondisease 
(PD) cohort. 
The 
number inside 
eachnode 
represents 
the 
number of people 
withthe 
correspondingcognitive 
status 
indicatedbyits 
color. 
The 
nodes 
withdashedlines 
represent 
people 
withonlydata 
fromthe 
first 
visit. 
The 
links 
represent 
the 
groupparticipants 
who 
continuedtothe 
next 
visit. 
PDD,PD 
withdementia; 
PD-MCI,PD 
withmildcognitive 
impairment; 
PD-NCI,PD 
withnocognitive 
impairment. 
(Reproducedwithpermissionfrom 
Phongpreecha 
T,CholertonB,Mata 
IF,et 
al. 
Multivariate 
predictionof dementia 
inParkinson’s 
disease. 
NPJ 
Parkinsons 
Dis. 
2020;6:20.) 


Most patients with PD exhibit at least some decline in attention, working 
memory, processing speed, or other executive functions, although the nature 
and degree of impairments across other domains are variable. PDD is often 
characterized by worsening visuospatial deficits, impaired verbal fluency, 
difficulty planning or shifting to a new stimulus, slowed information 
processing speed, and impaired memory. Memory impairment is most 
frequently attributable to a retrieval deficit since recognition is often intact. 
Procedural learning may be impaired, a pattern atypical in normal aging or in 
AD. Some language skills are intact, such as vocabulary, while others that 



tap additional cognitive domains, such as verbal fluency, may be impaired. 
Mechanical aspects of speech are often impaired as well. Although PDD has 
been previously characterized as a “subcortical” dementia to distinguish it 
from cortical dementias such as AD, this characterization has been criticized 
more recently and may serve simply as a gross depiction of the cognitive 
profile. Indeed, recent research suggests that while initial mild cognitive 
deficits in PD likely result from depleted dopamine in the midbrain and 
resulting defects in the frontostriatal loop, cortical pathology is required for 
progression to dementia. 


DementiawithLewybodies Current consensus criteria for probable DLB include 


(1)a diagnosis of dementia (defined as cognitive impairment sufficient to 
impair functional abilities) and (2) two or more core clinical features 
(fluctuating cognition, well-formed visual hallucinations, rapid eye 
movement [REM] sleep behavior disorder, and/or one or more cardinal 
motor symptoms of PD), or one core clinical features in the presence of one 
or more indicative biomarkers (eg, reduced dopamine uptake on SPECT or 
PET scan, REM sleep disorder diagnosed by polysomnography). As 
discussed above, DLB and PDD share many of the same features, including 
cognitive fluctuations, neuropsychiatric features, and motor symptoms. 
However, the timing and severity of these symptoms may differ. Visual 
hallucinations often occur earlier in DLB, delusions may be more common, 
and a differential response to antiparkinsonian medications has been 
reported. In terms of cognition, prominent visuospatial and executive 
impairments are noted, similar to PDD. Memory impairments, although not 
necessary for diagnosis, tend to be more prominent in DLB. It is thus 
unsurprising that among patients with DLB, there tends to be a likelihood of 
concurrent AD pathology. 
Given the overlap in symptoms and pathology, differential diagnosis 
between DLB and AD can thus also be difficult. The presence of visual 
hallucinations in patients with MMSE scores greater than 20 is highly 
suggestive of DLB. Neuropsychological studies have identified typical 
cognitive profiles that may aid in diagnosis. In DLB, patients have more 
difficulty than AD patients in copying complex designs, assembling pieces of 
an object, or completing other tasks requiring visuospatial skills. In contrast, 
AD subjects generally show significantly more impairment on delayed recall 
tasks than patients with DLB. DLB patients have attentional skills that are 
generally equivalent to those of AD patients; however, patients with DLB 



exhibit significant attentional fluctuations. As a result, evaluating attention 
over time is more helpful than the overall severity of attention problems in 
the differential diagnosis. Finally, these cognitive profiles are most evident 
early in the course of the diseases. As the diseases progress, all cognitive 
functions become impaired and neuropsychological testing is less helpful for 
diagnosis. 


Palliative 
care 
concerns 
specific 
to 
PD 
andDLB There is increasing recognition that 
appropriate palliative care that addresses cognitive changes in PD and DLB 
is both vital and underutilized. Given the range of symptoms in PD and 
associated caregiver and patient burden, an early focus on nonmotor 
symptom control, adjustment to cognitive changes, and advance care planning 
is strongly recommended in addition to routine care that has historically 
focused nearly solely on motor symptom management. To address the 
problems associated with increasing cognitive decline, occupational therapy, 
integrated care models, and psychoeducational programs for patients and 
family members may be helpful tools. In general, however, both patients and 
caregivers report that they are not provided with enough information about 
the nature and prognosis of the diagnosis, and thus lack the tools necessary to 
address end-of-life care issues and mitigate problems associated with 
advancing cognitive disease, such as medication reconciliation and home 
safety issues. DLB is associated with specific difficulties in accessing 
palliative care, largely due to lack of knowledge about the diagnosis in the 
general medical community and related difficulty in adequately diagnosing 
DLB. Further, patients with DLB often present with behavioral problems that 
may result in difficulty accessing resources. As a result, patients are often not 
appropriately medicated and physicians rarely discuss what to expect as the 
disease progresses. Assessment resources such as the Palliative Care 
Outcome Scale or the Edmonton Symptom Assessment System may be helpful 
to identify care needs in patients. However, provider education is a vital 
initial step to providing adequate community palliative care for PD/DLB. 


Vascular Cognitive Impairment 


VCI is an umbrella term that includes both mild VCI and major VCI (VaD) in 
the context of imaging evidence for cerebrovascular disease. A diagnosis of 
mild VCI requires impairment in at least one cognitive domain with mild or 
no impairment in activities of daily living that are independent from any 
motor or sensory impairments caused by the vascular event. A diagnosis of 



major VCI (or VaD) requires significant deficits in at least one cognitive 
domain along with correlated impairment in daily functional activities (again 
that are independent of any motor or sensory sequelae associated with the 
vascular event). VaD subtypes include poststroke dementia (the only subtype 
that requires a clear temporal relationship between vascular event and 
cognitive decline), subcortical ischemic VaD, multi-infarct dementia, or 
mixed dementia (representing combined suspected vascular disease and 
other neurodegenerative diseases including AD and LBD). 


Cognitive profiles of patients with VCI, especially in mild or early 
forms, can be quite variable given the underlying neuropathologic 
heterogeneity associated with the diagnosis. Executive function deficits, 
reduced verbal fluency, and slow processing speed are common. Depression, 
irritability, and lack of initiative are also frequently seen in patients with 


VCI. Contrary to long-standing clinical lore, VCI does not necessarily 
present primarily with a clear temporal relationship to a known vascular 
event nor to stepwise deterioration in cognition. Rather, continuous small 
vessel insults can lead to slowly progressive decline in cognitive abilities. 
Thus, it can be difficult to differentiate VaD from AD on the basis of the 
clinical course of symptoms. Detailed review of cardiovascular risk factors 
and cognitive profile may provide better differentiation. A review of studies 
examining early-stage AD and VaD found that the latter group had more 
pronounced deficits in executive function on tests such as the Wisconsin Card 
Sorting Test and the executive function scale of the Mattis Dementia Rating 
Scale than did adults with AD. Interestingly, performance between the two 
groups was similar on tests of selective attention and working memory such 
as the Trail-Making Test and Stroop Color Word Interference Test. In 
contrast, VaD patients had better performance than AD patients on tests of 
verbal learning and story recall, such as the California Verbal Learning Test 
and the Logical Memory subtest of the Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised 
(WMS-R), with fewer intrusions. However, VCI can impact the structure and 
function of the hippocampus, thus leading to more notable memory deficits in 
some patients, although these impairments may not occur until later in the 
disease process. Because memory impairment is most often the reason 
patients seek evaluation, adults with VaD may have more progressed 
dementia and greater cognitive impairment at the time of diagnosis. It is 
important to note that as both VaD and AD progress, the cognitive profiles 
become more similar, so that differentiating mid-stage disease is very 

difficult. In addition, neuropathologic studies have shown that many patients 
previously diagnosed with VaD due to presence of vascular risk factors such 
as diabetes, hypertension, and radiologic evidence of ischemia have 
prominent AD pathology as well. Prevalence estimates of the co-occurrence 
of AD and VaD range from 20% to 40% of patients with dementia. Few 
studies have attempted to differentiate between mixed AD/VaD and either 
form of dementia on a neuropsychological basis, although it has been 
suggested that mixed dementia most closely resembles VaD from a cognitive 
perspective. Vascular pathology increases the likelihood that patients with 
neuropathologic AD will show significant cognitive impairment. 


Palliative 
care 
concerns 
specific 
to 
VCI Given the variable (and often unknown) 
progression of cognitive symptoms in VCI, palliative care concerns are 
likely to be patient-specific, and may include lifestyle interventions aimed at 
maximizing retained cognitive abilities, quality of life, and overall physical 
health. Occupational therapy, psychoeducation, managing comorbid 
depression, and training and support for caregivers may all be helpful 
interventions. In advanced major VCI, palliative care interventions and endof-
life planning and preparation similar to those used most frequently in AD 
are recommended. 


Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration 


Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is caused by a range of 
underlying neuropathologic conditions (including intracellular inclusions of 
tau or transactive response DNA-binding protein [TDP-43], among others). 
FTLD onset occurs at slightly younger ages than other conditions such as AD, 
with onset occurring most commonly in the late 50s-to-early 60s. It is thought 
to be the second most common form of dementia in individuals under the age 
of 65. Roughly 30% to 40% of FTLD cases are linked to genetic mutations, 
including granulin (GRN) and microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) 
mutations, and patients with some types of genetic mutations may develop 
symptoms at even earlier ages. As with AD, FTLD patients show insidious 
onset of symptoms with a gradual progression. Various clinical presentations 
can be caused by FTLD, primarily resulting in gradually progressive 
disturbances in language and/or behavior. Although comparisons of AD and 
FTLD groups do not always reveal significantly different cognitive profiles, 
in general, FTLD patients show relatively spared memory performance in 
comparison to their executive and language functioning, especially when 



memory cues are provided. Apraxia is also more common in FTLD than in 
AD. Often a multidisciplinary approach may be most helpful in the 
differential diagnosis since studies indicate that up to 75% of pathologically 
confirmed FTLD patients also appear to meet clinical criteria for probable 
AD, and certain subtypes of FTLD are often misdiagnosed as a primary 
psychiatric disorder early on. The following diagnostic variants are currently 
recognized as most likely resulting from FTLD, although the extent to which 
these conditions may have shared pathology with other diseases, and the 
likelihood that these represent distinct disorders is not currently well 
defined. 


Behavioral 
variant FTLD This diagnostic category (bvFTD) accounts for nearly 
50% to 60% of all FTLD diagnoses. This variant most often presents initially 
with a prominent decline in social cognition and behavior and/or executive 
dysfunction, with relative sparing of other cognitive functions, and includes 
at least three of the following: (a) disinhibition, (b) apathy, (c) diminished 
empathy/sympathy, (d) perseverative, stereotyped, or compulsive behaviors, 
and/or (e) hyperorality/dietary changes. These behavioral and/or executive 
symptoms are the source of impairment in daily activities. While these 
criteria are sufficient for a diagnosis of “possible” bvFTD, a diagnosis of 
“probable” bvFTD requires neuroimaging findings of disproportionate 
frontal or temporal lobe involvement, or a pathogenic mutation. Early in the 
disease process, performances on formal neuropsychological testing may be 
remarkably well preserved, underscoring the importance of a thorough 
diagnostic interview and history with the patient and an informant; however, 
many individuals do display impaired selective and divided attention, 
difficulty shifting mental set, poor abstraction and reasoning, impaired verbal 
fluency, and perseverations. Unfortunately, cognitive screeners such as the 
MMSE are not very helpful in screening for early bvFTD since many patients 
score within normal limits early in the disease. 


Primaryprogressive 
aphasia PPA typically occurs in the fifth or sixth decade of 
life, and its rate of progression varies greatly. The diagnosis of PPA requires 
initial prominent language dysfunction with relative sparing of other 
cognitive domains early on, and the absence of radiologic evidence of 
cerebrovascular or other neurologic injury that would account for the 
aphasia. Because anomia and other language deficits may occur in a number 
of neurodegenerative conditions, the differential diagnosis of PPA rests on 
the clear demonstration that nonlinguistic cognitive and behavioral functions 



are intact during the initial stages of the disease. The clinician must carefully 
determine whether poor performance on memory and other nonlanguage tests 
is due to language deficits such as impaired comprehension of instructions. 
Differential diagnosis is also complicated by the heterogenous etiologies of 
PPA demonstrated by the different subtypes. Although not consistent across 
all cases, agrammatic PPA is often associated with tau pathology, logopenic 
PPA with AD pathology (although not always in brain regions typically 
associated with AD), and semantic PPA with TDP-43 pathology. PPA 
variants include (1) agrammatic/nonfluent aphasia and (2) semantic variant 
PPA (sometimes called semantic dementia [SD]). As noted, a third variant, 
LPA, is often included under the larger umbrella of PPA; however, 
neuropathologically, LPA is primarily attributed to AD-type pathology, so it 
is often considered a language-variant of AD. 


Progressive 
Nonfluent/Agrammatic 
Aphasia Progressive nonfluent/agrammatic 
aphasia (PNFA) is characterized by labored articulation and/or 
agrammatism, frequently occurring alongside apraxia of speech. Patients with 
PNFA also typically have intact comprehension for simple speech and 
phrases but impaired comprehension for complex or syntactically irregular 
phrases. Semantic knowledge is also well preserved. 


Semantic 
Dementia SD, on the other hand, involves a loss of ability to 
understand words (semantic knowledge of words and objects), which is 
accompanied by marked deficits in confrontational naming. Other deficits 
include difficulty with visual recognition of objects, dyslexia, and 
dysgraphia. Patients with semantic dementia may display prominent visual 
agnosias and may not be able to demonstrate object use accurately. In 
contrast to PNFA, speech production remains intact in early disease as does 
repetition. 


Logopenic 
Aphasia LPA is the most recently characterized PPA variant. LPA 
presents with impaired word retrieval in spontaneous speech and difficulty 
with naming, in addition to impaired sentence repetition, and in some 
instances, sentence comprehension. The hypothesized mechanism behind 
some of the language deficits in LPA, especially impaired sentence 
repetition, is a deficiency in short-term working memory, and hence, singleword 
repetition, which requires minimal working memory, is well 
preserved. The naming deficit in LPA is not as dramatic as in SD, and these 
patients also have preserved object knowledge. While patients with LPA 



demonstrate effortful word retrieval, this again is less severe than in PNFA 
and their speech is usually grammatically accurate and free from motor 
speech abnormalities, which marks another useful distinction between LPA 
and other PPA subtypes. 


FTLD 
movement disorders Certain movement disorders, which may also include 
behavioral and/or language disturbance, may be caused by or associated with 
FTLD. 


FTLD-Motor 
Neuron 
Disease Frontotemporal dementia with motor neuron disease 
(FTD-MND) tends to be a rapidly progressive condition, with death 
typically occurring 3 to 5 years after symptom onset. Age of onset is more 
variable and can range from 35 to 75, on average. The FTD-MND syndrome 
is typically characterized by gradual onset of both cognitive and psychiatric 
symptoms, in addition to, though not necessarily simultaneously to, 
development of classic upper and/or lower motor neuron dysfunction, such 
as muscle wasting, paraparesis, fasciculations, or abnormal reflexes. Early 
bulbar involvement can also lead to symptoms of dysphagia and 
pseudobulbar affect, or uncontrollable episodes of laughing or tearfulness. 
Behaviorally, these patients may display similar symptoms to patients with 
bvFTD. Cognitive symptoms can include variable language and executive 
dysfunction. 


Progressive 
Supranuclear 
Palsy Although Lewy bodies are found in only the 
minority of progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) cases, PSP is frequently 
misdiagnosed as PD. A core feature of the disorder is vertical supranuclear 
gaze palsy, although this symptom may not present early in the course of the 
disease. Patients also present with postural instability, and falls are often 
seen shortly after onset. Cognition is characterized by mental and 
psychomotor slowing and notable executive dysfunction, often fairly early in 
the disease course. Memory impairments are observed, but they are not as 
severe as in AD. Language functions resemble those seen in PD. Visual 
spatial deficits and increased apathy are also observed. 


Corticobasal 
Syndrome Corticobasal syndrome (CBS) is the primary clinical 
phenotype of corticobasal degeneration, which is characterized by abnormal 
tau deposition, and relatively focal and asymmetric cortical atrophy in frontal 
and parietal brain regions on imaging. The mean age of onset for CBS is in 
the early 60s. CBS is characterized by progressive, asymmetric motor 
symptoms such as tremor, loss of coordination, rigidity, and myoclonus, and a 



higher prevalence of alien limb syndrome. Unilateral apraxia (most 
commonly ideomotor) is common. A range of language abnormalities 
including slowed verbal fluency, and/or executive dysfunction may also be 
seen in CBS. In contrast to AD, memory is typically well preserved early on, 
but may worsen with disease progression and may even become prominent in 
some patients. Neuropsychiatric and behavioral symptoms are common and 
can include apathy, personality change, disinhibition, and irritability. 


Palliative 
care 
concerns 
specific 
to 
FTLD Given the heterogeneity in FTLD 
phenotypes, care recommendations vary by subtype. Many of the core 
symptoms of bvFTD and related subtypes, including impulsivity, poor 
judgment, and disinhibition, can be distressing for family members, so 
education about bvFTD and early support for family and caregivers is 
essential. Education about possible environment and behavioral 
modifications is recommended and typically focuses on mitigating safety 
risks (eg, driving impulsively, poor management of money, falling victim to 
scams, etc) given reductions in insight and self-awareness are quite common 
in bvFTD. Early consultation with a psychiatrist is often helpful as well; 
there is some evidence that treatment with selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors may be helpful in managing unwanted behavioral symptoms. 
Patients with either primary (PPA subtypes) or secondary language 
dysfunction (PSP; CBS; FTD-MND) may benefit from consultation with a 
speech-language pathologist (SLP) early on in the course of their disease, 
who may be able to provide useful strategies. Augmentative and alternative 
communication devices can also be employed as the condition progresses. 
SLPs may also be of benefit as part of a multidisciplinary team as some of 
these patients may have, or go on to develop, dysarthria and/or dysphagia. 
Physical therapy can also be a valuable tool to assist with early motor 
dysfunction in FTD-MND, PSP, and CBS. Like most neurodegenerative 
conditions, motor and/or sensory dysfunction can occur in other FTLD 
subtypes as well as the disease progresses to moderate or severe stages. 


Dementia Due to Suspected Non-Alzheimer Disease Pathophysiology 


Dementia due to suspected non-Alzheimer disease pathophysiology (SNAP) 
is a relatively new biomarker-based term that is used to describe individuals 
who have evidence of neurodegeneration on neuroimaging, but who lack 
biomarkers classic to AD—specifically, amyloid. SNAP is more prevalent 
with increasing age. While there is little evidence of SNAP in persons 



younger than 50, prevalence increases with increasing age after the age of 60. 
Most commonly, the term SNAP has been used to describe individuals with 
either normal cognition or MCI who lack evidence of clinically significant 
amyloid but have evidence of neurodegenerative changes in the brain. 
Neurodegeneration characteristic of SNAP is also observed in individuals 
with clinical dementia; however, these individuals’ condition is usually 
attributed to a non-AD etiology based on clinical presentation (eg PPA, 
DLB), and it is hypothesized that TDP-43, hippocampal sclerosis, vascular 
disease, and/or other pathophysiological processes may be the causative 
factor. No definitive cognitive phenotype has been identified in individuals 
with SNAP who are deemed clinically normal, though SNAP does appear to 
confer risk for subsequent cognitive decline. Not surprisingly, those with 
SNAP and MCI have greater likelihood of progression to dementia than those 
with SNAP and no evidence of MCI. Further, those with SNAP, regardless of 
cognitive status, have a greater risk of decline compared to those without 
SNAP. The data is mixed on the risk of decline in SNAP compared to those 
without SNAP but who are amyloid and/or tau positive, though it is generally 
accepted that the presence of neurodegeneration, amyloid, and tau combined 
confers the greatest risk for accelerated cognitive decline. 


Limbic-Predominant Age-Related TDP-43 Encephalopathy 


Limbic-predominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy (LATE) is a 
common, but relatively recently described finding in those in their eighth or 
ninth decade of life. Estimates vary, but recent autopsy studies of individuals 
aged 80 and older have identified evidence of LATE in 5% to 50% of their 
samples. This proteinopathy was first discovered in autopsies of individuals 
with cognitive impairment that mimicked AD; that is, these individuals had 
an amnestic cognitive syndrome similar to AD. Like AD, LATE can also 
evolve to include multiple cognitive domains but the clinical presentation 
remains distinct from other TDP-related conditions such as FTLD-TDP. 
Given the occurrence in very late life, it is unsurprising that the pathological 
changes of LATE often co-occur with those of AD, LBD, and/or VCI. While 
data on this entity is still in its infancy, there is some indication cognitive 
changes progress more slowly in those who only have evidence of LATE 
compared to those with evidence of multiple pathologies. 


Alcohol-Related Dementia 



Contradictory evidence exists as to the role of mild-to-moderate alcohol and 
risk for developing certain dementias, including AD and VaD. Chronic and 
profound alcohol use, however, can have a negative effect on cognition and 
may exacerbate the cognitive symptoms of other dementias and brain injuries. 
Poor nutrition (thiamine deficiency in particular) resulting from alcohol 
abuse is a primary contributor to the onset of cognitive problems. In addition, 
liver disease can interfere with thiamine regulation in the brain and may be a 
factor in the multiple cognitive and motor impairments associated with longterm 
alcohol use. 


Persistent alcohol 
dementia Alcohol dementia involves impairment in more than 
one area of cognitive function that persists after the patient stops drinking for 
a period of time. Visuospatial problem-solving deficits and executive 
problems, including apathy, decreased judgment, and reduced interest in selfcare, 
are prominent in these patients. Memory problems, in particular 
anterograde amnesia, are also common, but are generally not more impaired 
than other cognitive domains, and recognition is often intact. Typical 
neuropsychological sequelae include impairments on tasks requiring visual 
scanning, visuospatial organization, perceptual-motor speed, sustained 
attention, abstraction, and mental flexibility, while language functions are 
generally preserved. Perseveration and confabulation are common indicators 
of impaired executive function in the responses of patients with chronic 
alcohol use. It is also noteworthy that chronic alcohol use may potentiate the 
onset of AD, and produce a clinical picture of conjoint cognitive deficits. 


Wernicke–Korsakoffsyndrome The most severe neurologic outcome of heavy and 
prolonged alcohol use, and the result of critical malnutrition, is Wernicke– 
Korsakoff syndrome. In contrast to patients with persistent alcohol dementia, 
Wernicke–Korsakoff patients exhibit an acute symptom onset, often beginning 
with a grave confusional state, nystagmus, and significant ataxia. During this 
phase, symptoms progressively and rapidly worsen if treatment (immediate 
thiamine replacement) is not applied. This phase is almost always followed 
by a chronic and progressive stage that is associated primarily with impaired 
frontal and cerebellar functions. Unlike persistent alcohol dementia, 
Korsakoff patients have significant impairments in memory relative to other 
cognitive effects, and memory impairment includes both retrograde and 
anterograde amnesia for episodic events, frequently with prominent 
confabulation. In contrast to AD, semantic memory is relatively spared in the 
Korsakoff patient. Patients show a characteristic gradient of remote memory 



impairment, with better recall for remote events and progressively reduced 
recall of recent events. As with persistent alcohol dementia, executive 
dysfunction and visuospatial impairments are also significant symptoms of 
the syndrome. Cerebellar atrophy and peripheral nerve damage lead to 
impaired gait, decreased or abnormal reflexes, and other movement 
abnormalities in these patients. 


Palliative 
care 
concerns 
specific 
to 
alcohol-relateddementias Alcohol-related 
dementias, unlike progressive dementias such as AD and DLB, may be 
amenable to interventions if made in a timely manner (such as drinking 
cessation and nutritional supplementation), which may improve cognitive 
symptoms or stall further cognitive decline. Once these important 
interventions have been put in place, encouraging skill maintenance, 
providing adequate scaffolding for cognitive skills, maintaining daily 
structure and routine, and help with general self-care may be useful for 
maintaining maximal cognitive function. 


Prion Diseases 


The prion diseases are a group of rare fatal spongiform encephalopathies that 
result from mutations and polymorphisms in the prion protein gene (PrP), 
causing rapid neurodegeneration. These diseases, of which Creutzfeldt– 
Jakob is the most well-known, produce a profound and quickly progressive 
dementia, and may be sporadic, familial, or infectious. Sporadic cases are 
the most common, and are generally diagnosed in people in their 60s, with a 
typical age range between 40 and 80. Early cognitive signs of the prion 
diseases are usually vague and nonspecific, such as poor memory, 
concentration, and problem solving. Initially, there are also often psychiatric 
symptoms, including apathy, emotional lability, impaired sleep, and appetite 
loss. Early frank neurologic symptoms are not common, but as the disease 
progresses, hyperreflexia, impaired coordination, changes in saccadic eye 
movements, and incontinence may occur. Given the early vague symptoms 
and dearth of neurologic symptoms, patients are not likely to present for 
evaluation until they are in the more moderate-to-advanced stages, which can 
occur in a matter of months. Diagnosis typically involves measuring 
electroencephalographic changes, hyperintensities on MRI, and abnormal 143-
3 protein deposits in the CSF. The most common differential diagnoses 
include depression, AD, and LBD. Given the generally rapid course of 
disease in combination with diagnosis that typically occurs in the later stages 



of disease, palliative care often consists largely of hospice care, social work 
interventions to address disability and making end-of-life decisions, and 
bereavement resources and interventions for caregivers. 


Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus 


NPH is a potentially reversible dementia that makes up about 6% of 
dementia cases. Abnormalities in the production, absorption, or flow of CSF 
result in ventricular dilatation. Patients may present with a triad of clinical 
symptoms that include gait or balance disturbance, urinary incontinence, and 
cognitive deficits. Unlike most other dementias, cognitive symptoms often 
present later in the course. This can make early clinical diagnosis difficult 
since gait abnormalities and incontinence have a variety of etiologies in 
geriatric populations. Radiographic evidence and intraventricular pressure 
measurement aid in the diagnosis. When cognitive deficits are present, they 
are most frequently observed in executive functioning. Although many 
subjects may have subjective memory complaints, memory deficits are not a 
prominent early symptom, and some memory declines are attributable to 
attention problems, which are more common. However, many of these 
patients may have concurrent underlying neurodegenerative disease, and thus 
may present with varied cognitive profiles. 


When treated, a ventriculoperitoneal shunt is usually used to divert CSF 
for better absorption. However, surgery in geriatric populations always 
involves added risks, and the benefits of shunt surgery remain unclear. A 
wide variety of success rates have been reported, with better outcomes often 
reported after shorter follow-up periods. Patients with the full triad of 
symptoms appear to respond best to shunt surgery. Gait problems show the 
most frequent improvement, while cognitive function improves in the fewest 
patients. Recently, findings from a 5-year follow-up of NPH patients with 
and without shunt surgery showed that at the 6-month assessment, 83% of the 
shunt cases improved in gait and 46% improved in memory. Of surviving 
shunt cases 5 years after surgery, 39% remained improved in gait, and fewer 
than 10% continued to show improvements on cognitive tests. Results 
suggested that outcomes may be improved in younger patients. Palliative care 
may involve inpatient and outpatient rehabilitation, physical therapy, 
occupational therapy, and other interventions aimed at maximizing retained 
cognitive functions. 



HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorder 


Although there is often the perception that geriatric patients are not at risk for 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention reported that 10% of all HIV cases in the United 
States are in patients of 50 years or older, and these numbers are expected to 
grow. With the use of combination antiretroviral therapies, progression to 
HIV-associated dementia is rare (2–3%). However, the prevalence of milder 
cognitive deficits is more frequent, with prevalence estimates ranging from 
50% to 60%. Commonly affected areas of cognition are speed of information 
processing, attention, and motor speed, although it is increasingly recognized 
that impairments in broader executive functions, learning, and prospective 
memory are prevalent. As a result, differentiating these symptoms from early 
AD can be difficult clinically and may require more careful evaluation of 
both AD- and HIV-related CSF and imaging biomarkers. Palliative care 
depends upon severity of disease but should focus on managing potential 
multiple medical and psychosocial comorbidities and end-of-life planning as 
appropriate. 


Neurosyphilis 


Despite successes in treatment and education, syphilis cases have continually 
increased since 2000. Neurosyphilis can occur any time during the disease; 
however, syphilitic dementia may occur as the disease advances (generally 
5–25 years after initial infection) that may present with hallucinations, 
delusions, mood disturbance, personality change, strokes, ataxia, or cognitive 
decline. Deficits are observed in short-term memory and mental status with 
progressive cognitive decline in all areas of functioning. Although 
neurosyphilis is often classified as a reversible dementia, there is only 
limited evidence to support cognitive benefits with penicillin treatment. 
Thus, following treatment with penicillin, palliative care may include 
occupational therapy or cognitive rehabilitation to help maximize remaining 
cognitive function. Neurosyphilis is more likely to occur in patients with 
comorbid HIV, and thus both should be considered during differential 
diagnosis. Neurosyphilis should further be considered in a differential 
diagnosis of dementia of unclear etiology in geriatric patients. 


CONCLUSION 



We have greatly furthered our understanding that age-related medical 
conditions not considered classically neurologic in nature can nevertheless 
impact the central nervous system and thereby affect cognition. This 
knowledge has led to the realization that many of the changes in cognition 
previously thought to be unavoidable concomitants of normal aging are in 
fact preventable and in some cases even reversible. The deleterious 
consequences of not treating such disorders have become evident, given that 
many common diseases such as T2DM and hypertension appear to be risk 
factors for dementia. In turn, early identification of dementia or the 
prodromal condition MCI will become critical as therapeutic options for 
delaying disease progression proliferate. Careful characterization of 
cognitive status through neuropsychological assessment can provide the 
clinician with essential information to determine whether the patient is 
experiencing symptoms that warrant concern or further treatment. As the field 
of geriatrics approaches the goal of controlling or even preventing endemic 
late-life chronic diseases, it will become increasingly clear that deleterious 
cognitive changes that occur with healthy aging are fewer and more subtle 
than we thought, and that they are accompanied by age-related strengths in 
experience and knowledge that will enable us to lead vital, productive lives 
well into our 80s and beyond. 


FURTHERREADING
Albert MS, DeKosky ST, Dickson D, et al. The diagnosis of mild cognitive 
impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the 
National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on 
diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 
2011;7(3):270–279. 


Bennett S, Thomas AJ. Depression and dementia: cause, consequence or 
coincidence? 
Maturitas. 2014;79(2):184–189. 


Berger I, Wu S, Masson P, et al. Cognition in chronic kidney disease: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Med. 2016;14(1):206. 


Biessels GJ, Despa F. Cognitive decline and dementia in diabetes mellitus: 
mechanisms and clinical implications. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 
2018;14(10):591–604. 



Burkauskas J, Lang P, Bunevičius A, et al. Cognitive function in patients with 
coronary artery disease: a literature review. J Int Med Res. 
2018;46(10):4019–4031. 


Cairns NJ, Bigio EH, Mackenzie IR, et al. Neuropathologic diagnostic and 
nosologic criteria for frontotemporal lobar degeneration: consensus of 
the Consortium for Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration. Neuropathol. 
2007;114(1):5–22. 


Cheng C, Huang CL, Tsai CJ, et al. Alcohol-related dementia: a systematic 
review of epidemiological studies. Psychosomatics. 2017;58(4):331– 
342. 


Emre M, Aarsland D, Brown R, Clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia 
associated with Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord. 2007;22(12):1689– 
1707. 


Inouye SK, Westendorp RG, Saczynski JS. Delirium in elderly people. 
Lancet. 2014;383(9920):911–922. 


Iwasaki Y. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Neuropathology. 2017;37(2):174– 
188. 


Krause D, Roupas P. Effect of vitamin intake on cognitive decline in older 
adults: evaluation of the evidence. J Nutr Health Aging. 
2015;19(7):745–753. 


Laursen P. The impact of aging on cognitive function: an 11-year follow-up 
study of four age cohorts. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl. 1997;172:7–86. 


Litvan I, Goldman JG, Tröster AI, et al. Diagnostic criteria for mild 
cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease: Movement Disorder 
Society Task Force guidelines. Mov Disord. 2012;27(3):349–356. 


Loggia G, Attoh-Mensah E, Pothier K, et al. Psychotropic polypharmacy in 
adults 55 years or older: a risk for impaired global cognition, executive 
function, and mobility. Front Pharmacol. 2020;10:1659. 


McKeith IG, Boeve BF, Dickson DW. Diagnosis and management of 
dementia with Lewy bodies: fourth consensus report of the DLB 
consortium. Neurology. 2017;89(1):88–100. 


McKhann GM, Knopman DS, Chertkow H, et al. The diagnosis of dementia 
due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute 
on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines 
for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 2011;7(3):263–269. 


Olaithe M, Bucks RS, Hillman DR, et al. Cognitive deficits in obstructive 
sleep apnea: insights from a meta-review and comparison with deficits 



observed in COPD, insomnia, and sleep deprivation. Sleep Med Rev. 
2018;38:39–49. 


Oliveira LM, Nitrini R, Román GC. Normal-pressure hydrocephalus: a 
critical review. Dement Neuropsychol. 2019:13(2):133–143. 


Skrobot OA, Black SE, Chen C, et al. Progress toward standardized 
diagnosis of vascular cognitive impairment: Guidelines from the Vascular 
Impairment of Cognition Classification Consensus Study. Alzheimers 
Dement. 2018;14(3):280–292. 


Smail RC, Brew BJ. HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder. Handb Clin 
Neurol. 2018;152:75–97. 



Chapter 


Delirium 


Matthew 
E. 
Growdon, 
Tanya Mailhot, 
Jane S. 
Saczynski, 
Tamara 


G. 
Fong, 
Sharon 
K. 
Inouye 
Delirium, an acute disorder of attention and global cognitive function, is a 
common, serious, and potentially preventable source of morbidity and 
mortality for hospitalized older persons. Delirium affects as many as half of 
all people age 65 and older who are hospitalized. With the aging of the US 
population, delirium has assumed heightened importance because persons 
aged 65 and older presently account for nearly 40% of all days of hospital 
care. Total costs attributable to delirium spanning the hospital and 
posthospital period exceed $60,000 per patient; annually over $183 billion 
(in 2018 US dollars) of US health care costs are attributable to delirium. 
Importantly, delirium is preventable in up to 50% of cases. Substantial 
additional costs linked to delirium accrue after hospital discharge because of 
the increased need for institutionalization, rehabilitation services, closer 
medical follow-up, and home health care. Delirium often initiates a cascade 
of events in older persons, leading to a downward spiral of functional and 
cognitive decline, loss of independence, institutionalization, and ultimately, 
death. Delirium is a critical risk marker to identify patients at high risk for 
poor outcomes. Recently, this fact has been underscored in the care of 
patients affected by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) during the COVID-19 pandemic, as those who present with 
delirium experience worse hospital outcomes compared to those who do not. 
With its common occurrence, its frequently iatrogenic nature, and its close 
linkage to the processes of care, incident delirium can serve as a marker for 
the quality of hospital care and provides an important opportunity for quality 
improvement. 



DEFINITION 


The definition of and diagnostic criteria for delirium continue to evolve. 
Standardized criteria for delirium in the American Psychiatric Association’s 


Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition 


(DSM-5, 2013) represent the current diagnostic standard. These criteria are 
based on (A) a disturbance in attention and awareness; (B) an acute onset 
and fluctuating course; (C) an additional deficit in cognition (such as 
memory, orientation, language, or visuoperceptual ability); (D) impairments 
not better explained by dementia and do not occur in context of severely 
impaired level of consciousness or coma; and (E) evidence of an underlying 
medical etiology or multiple etiologies. Expert consensus was used to 
develop these criteria, however, and performance characteristics such as 
diagnostic sensitivity and specificity have not yet been reported for DSM-5 
criteria. A standardized tool, the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM), 
provides a brief, validated diagnostic algorithm that is currently in 
widespread use for identification of delirium. The CAM algorithm relies on 
the presence of acute onset and fluctuating course, inattention, and either 
disorganized thinking or altered level of consciousness. The algorithm has a 
sensitivity of 94% to 100%, specificity of 90% to 95%, and high interrater 
reliability. Given the uncertainty of diagnostic criteria for delirium, a critical 
area for future investigation is to establish more definitive criteria, including 
epidemiologic and phenomenologic evaluations assisted by advances in 
neuroimaging and other potential diagnostic marker tests. 


LearningObjectives
■ 
Learnthe 
epidemiology,pathophysiology,clinicalpresentations,evaluation,andmanagementof 
deliriuminolder adults. 
■ 
Understandthe 
role 
of various 
predisposingandprecipitatingfactors 
inincreasingriskof older 
persons 
todeliriumandassociatedprognosis 
andmortality. 
■ 
Learnthe 
specialrelationshipbetweendementia 
anddeliriumandthe 
role 
of certainmedications 
inpredisposingolder adults 
todelirium. 
■ 
Recognize 
thatdeliriumis 
preventable 
inupto50% 
of cases 
withproveneffective 
nonpharmacologic 
approaches. 
■ 
Gaina 
clear understandingof the 
specific 
indications 
andefficacyof various 
treatments,including 
pharmacologic 
andnonpharmacologic 
strategies 
commonlyusedtomanage 
delirium. 

■ 
Understandthe 
latestconcepts 
aboutspecialissues 
relatedtodelirium,includingthe 
COVID-19 
pandemic,patient 
preferences 
anddecisionmaking,nursinghome 
care,andpalliative 
andend-oflife 
care. 
KeyClinicalPoints
1. 
Delirium is commonly encountered in older adults in various 
clinical settings and associated with significant morbidity and 
mortality, especially in intensive care units, inpatient settings, 
nursing homes, and following major medical illnesses or surgery. 
2. 
Delirium is unrecognized in up to 70% of older patients and can 
lead to long-term functional and cognitive deficits. 
3. 
The pathophysiology of delirium is currently unclear but posited 
to be the end result of multiple pathogenic pathways eventually 
culminating in the dysfunction of various neurotransmitters and 
major brain networks. 
4. 
Delirium is commonly due to multiple causes and is preventable in 
up to 50% of cases through addressing as many predisposing and 
precipitating factors as possible. 
5. 
Among the precipitating factors, decreased mobility is strongly 
associated with delirium, and medical equipment and devices may 
further contribute to immobilization. 
6. 
Dementia is the underlying risk factor in up to two-thirds of 
cases of delirium and must be suspected in patients with slowly 
progressive cognitive and functional deficits. 
7. 
Acute onset, varying levels of alertness, and inattention are 
cardinal features of delirium, and obtaining historical details from 
a close family member or friend is critical in making a correct 
diagnosis of delirium. 
8. 
Nonpharmacologic strategies are the preferred treatment for 
delirium in older patients, and medications are reserved for more 
severe symptoms that affect either medical management or 
patient safety. 

EPIDEMIOLOGY 


Most of the epidemiologic studies of delirium involve hospitalized older 
patients, in whom the highest rates of delirium occur. Reported rates vary 
based on the subgroup of patients studied and the setting of care. Previous 
studies estimated the prevalence of delirium (present at the time of hospital 
admission) at 7% to 80% and the incidence of delirium (new cases arising 
during hospitalization) at 8% to 82%. The highest prevalence and incidence 
rates occur among ventilated intensive care unit patients. The incidence rates 
of delirium in high-risk hospital venues, such as the intensive care unit and 
surgical settings, range from 16% to 82% and 8% to 58%, respectively. 
Delirium occurs in up to 48% of patients in nursing homes or postacute 
settings, and in up to 83% of all patients at the end of life. The rates of 
delirium in all older persons presenting to the emergency department in 
several studies have ranged from 8% to 27%. While less frequent in the 
community setting, delirium is an important presenting symptom to outpatient 
clinics and often heralds serious underlying disease. Delirium is often 
unrecognized. Previous studies have documented that clinicians fail to detect 
up to 70% to 85% of affected patients across all of these settings. 
Furthermore, the presence of delirium portends a potentially poor prognosis. 
Delirium in the intensive care unit is associated with a fourfold increased 
risk of in-hospital mortality and a sixfold increased risk of mortality at 6 
months. In the emergency department, delirium is associated with a sevenfold 
increased risk of mortality at 6 months. Longer lengths of stay, cognitive and 
functional sequelae lasting up to 1 year postoperatively, and 
institutionalization are also consequences of delirium. 


PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 


The fundamental pathophysiologic mechanisms of delirium remain unclear. 
Delirium is thought to represent a functional rather than structural lesion. The 
characteristic electroencephalographic (EEG) findings demonstrate global 
functional derangements and generalized slowing of cortical background 
(alpha) activity. It has been hypothesized that delirium is mediated via a final 
common pathway of different but interacting pathogenic mechanisms leading 
to dysfunction of multiple brain regions and neurotransmitter systems and 



culminating in disruption of large-scale networks. Evidence for a single 
pathway is lacking, and it remains difficult to ascribe delirium to a distinct 
neurobiological mechanism. Another hypothesis which has gained favor is 
that delirium occurs in the setting of an acute stressor, such as surgery or 
sepsis, superimposed on an underlying brain vulnerability, such as cognitive 
impairment or frailty. This model suggests that as vulnerability increases, 
delirium can be triggered by relatively minor acute stressors. Numerous 
contributions to brain vulnerability have been suggested, such as structural 
lesions, vascular changes, alterations in brain connectivity, 
neuroinflammation, or neurodegeneration, and other age-related changes. 
Evidence from EEG, evoked-potential studies, and neuroimaging studies in 
delirium suggest focal dysfunction localized to the prefrontal cortex, 
thalamus, basal ganglia, temporoparietal cortex, fusiform, and lingual gyri of 
the nondominant cortex. Studies using computed tomography (CT) or 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have found lesions or structural 
abnormalities in the brains of patients with delirium. Single-photon emission 
computed tomography (SPECT) studies have shown that delirium is mostly 
associated with decreased cerebral blood flow, but these results have been 
variable. 


Associated neurotransmitter abnormalities involve elevated brain 
dopaminergic function, reduced cholinergic function, or a relative imbalance 
of these systems. Serotonergic activity may interact to regulate or alter 
activity of these other two systems, and serotonin levels may be either 
increased or decreased. Extensive evidence supports the role of cholinergic 
deficiency. Acetylcholine plays a key role in consciousness and attentional 
processes. Given that delirium manifests as an acute confusional state often 
with alterations of consciousness, it is likely to have a cholinergic basis. 
Anticholinergic drugs can induce delirium in humans and animals, and serum 
anticholinergic activity is increased in patients with delirium. Physostigmine 
can reverse delirium associated with anticholinergic drugs, and 
cholinesterase inhibitors appear to have some benefit even in cases of 
delirium that are not induced by drugs. Neurotransmitter systems can also be 
affected indirectly. For instance, in sepsis, the systemic inflammatory 
response triggers a cascade of local (brain) neuroinflammation, leading to 
endothelial activation, impaired blood flow, neuronal apoptosis, and 
neurotransmitter dysfunction. Neuroinflammation can lead to microglial 
overactivation, resulting in a neurotoxic response with further neuronal 



injury. Animal studies have found that neurodegeneration causes priming of 
astrocytes and microglia, resulting in a greater neuroinflammatory response, 
as well as alterations in vasculature, including the blood-brain barrier, which 
may render the brain more vulnerable to circulating inflammatory molecules. 
The stress response associated with severe medical illness or surgery 
involves sympathetic and immune system activation, including increased 
activity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis with hypercortisolism, and 
release of cerebral cytokines that alter neurotransmitter systems, the thyroid 
axis, and modification of blood-brain barrier permeability. Age-related 
changes in central neurotransmission, stress management, hormonal 
regulation, and immune response may contribute to the increased 
vulnerability of older persons to delirium. The description of delirium as 
“acute brain failure”—involving multiple neural circuits, neurotransmitters, 
and brain regions—suggests that understanding delirium may help to 
elucidate the underlying mechanisms of brain functioning. 


ETIOLOGY 


The etiology of delirium is usually multifactorial. Among older persons, 
delirium results from the interrelationship between patient vulnerability (ie, 
predisposing factors) and the occurrence of noxious insults (ie, precipitating 
factors). For example, patients who are highly vulnerable to delirium at 
baseline (eg, such as patients with dementia or serious illness) can 
experience delirium after exposure to otherwise mild insults, such as a single 
dose of a sedative medication. Older patients with few predisposing factors 
(low baseline vulnerability) are relatively resistant, with precipitation of 
delirium only after exposure to multiple potentially noxious insults, such as 
general anesthesia, major surgery, multiple psychoactive medications, 
immobilization, and infection (Figure 58-1). Based on validated predictive 
models for delirium, the effects of multiple risk factors appear to be 
cumulative. Clinically, the importance of the multifactorial nature of delirium 
is that removal or treatment of one risk factor alone often fails to resolve 
delirium. Instead, addressing many or all of the predisposing and 
precipitating factors for delirium is often required before the delirium 
symptoms will improve. 



FIGURE 58-1. 
Multifactorialmodelfor delirium. 
The 
etiologyof deliriuminvolves 
a 
complex 
interrelationshipbetweenthe 
patient’s 
underlyingvulnerabilityor predisposingfactors 
(left 
axis) 
andprecipitatingfactors 
or noxious 
insults 
(right 
axis). 
For example,a 
patient 
withhigh 
vulnerability,suchas 
withsevere 
dementia,underlyingsevere 
illness,or hearingor vision 
impairment,might 
developdeliriumwithexposure 
toonlyone 
dose 
of a 
sleepingmedication. 
Conversely,a 
patient 
withlow 
vulnerabilitywoulddevelopdeliriumonlywithexposure 
tomany 
noxious 
insults,suchas 
generalanesthesia 
andmajor surgery,intensive 
care 
unit 
(ICU) stay, 
multiple 
psychoactive 
medications,andprolongedsleepdeprivation. 


Predisposing Factors 


Predisposing factors for delirium include preexisting cognitive impairment 
or dementia, a history of delirium, advanced age (> 70 years), severe 
underlying illness and multimorbidity, functional impairment, depression, 
alcohol abuse, a history of stroke, hypertension or transient ischemic attack, 
carotid artery disease and sensory impairments (vision or hearing) (Table 
58-1). Preexisting cognitive impairment, including dementia, is one of the 
most powerful and consistent risk factors for delirium demonstrated across 
multiple studies in various settings, with patients with dementia having a 
two- to fivefold increased risk for delirium. Up to two thirds of delirious 
patients have underlying dementia. Nearly any chronic medical condition can 
predispose a patient to delirium, ranging from diseases involving the central 
nervous system to diseases outside the central nervous system, including 



infectious, metabolic, cardiac, pulmonary, endocrine, or neoplastic 
etiologies. Predictive risk models that identify predisposing factors in 
populations, such as general medicine, intensive care, surgical patients 
(cardiac and noncardiac), cancer patients, and nursing home residents, can 
help identify patients at an increased risk of delirium. 


TABLE 58-1■PREDISPOSING AND PRECIPITATING FACTORSFOR DELIRIUM FROM VALIDATED PREDICTIVE MODELS

Precipitating Factors 


Major precipitating factors identified in validated predictive models include 
medication use (see section on “Drug Use and Delirium”), which are 
associated with up to a fivefold increased risk of delirium, use of indwelling 
bladder catheters, use of physical restraints, dehydration, malnutrition, 
iatrogenic events, infections, metabolic and electrolyte derangements, 
surgery, admissions that are urgent or involve trauma, extended ICU stays (> 
10 days), and coma (see 
Table 58-1). Decreased mobility is strongly 
associated with delirium and concomitant functional decline. The use of 
medical equipment and devices (eg, indwelling bladder catheters and 
physical restraints) may further contribute to immobilization. Major 
iatrogenic events occur in up to 40% of older hospitalized adults (three to 
five times the risk when compared with adults younger than 65 years) and 
double the risk for development of delirium. Examples include complications 
related to diagnostic or therapeutic procedures, allergic reactions, and 
bleeding caused by over-anticoagulation. Disorders of any major organ 
system, particularly renal or hepatic failure, can precipitate delirium. Occult 
respiratory failure has emerged as an increasing problem in older patients, 
who often lack the typical signs and symptoms of dyspnea and tachypnea. In 
older adults, acute myocardial infarction and congestive heart failure may 
present with delirium or “failure to thrive” as the cardinal feature, and 
minimal symptoms of angina or dyspnea. Occult infection is a particularly 
noteworthy cause of delirium because older patients may not present with 
leukocytosis or a typical febrile response. Metabolic and endocrinologic 
disorders, such as hyper- or hyponatremia, hypercalcemia, acid-base 
disorders, hypo- and hyperglycemia, and thyroid or adrenal disorders, may 
also contribute to delirium. Precipitating factors for delirium in hospitalized 
older patients that have been validated include use of physical restraints, 
malnutrition, more than three medications added during the previous day (> 
70% of these were psychoactive drugs), indwelling bladder catheter, and any 
iatrogenic event. The presence of each of these independent factors confers a 
two- to fourfold increased risk of delirium. The presence of multiple factors 
has a cumulative effect, yet each risk factor is potentially modifiable. 


Drug Use and Delirium 


In 30% or more of delirium cases, use of one or more specific medications 
contributes to its development. While medications often incite delirium, they 



are also the most common remediable cause of delirium. The most common 
culprit medications have psychoactive effects, such as sedative hypnotics, 
anxiolytics, narcotics, and medications with anticholinergic activity (Table 
58-2). In previous studies, use of any psychoactive medication was 
associated with a fourfold increased risk of delirium; use of two or more 
psychoactive medications was associated with a fivefold increased risk. 
Sedative-hypnotic drugs are associated with a 3- to 12-fold increased risk of 
delirium; narcotics with a threefold risk; and anticholinergic drugs with a 5to 
12-fold risk. The incidence of delirium, similar to other adverse drug 
events, increases in direct proportion to the number of medications 
prescribed because of the effects of the medications themselves and the 
increased risk of drug–drug and drug–disease interactions. Suboptimal 
medication management, ranging from inappropriate use to overuse of 
psychoactive medications, occurs commonly in older adults, suggesting that 
many cases of delirium and related adverse drug events may be preventable. 


TABLE 58-2■MEDICATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH INDUCINGOR WORSENING OF DELIRIUM (AMERICAN GERIATRICSSOCIETY BEERS CRITERIA, 2019)

