Relationship Between Delirium and Dementia 


Delirium and dementia frequently coexist, with dementia being a leading risk 
factor for delirium and delirium resulting in worsened cognitive functioning. 
The contribution of delirium to permanent cognitive impairment or dementia 
is an area of active research, given the fact that after delirium, some patients 
never recover to their baseline level of cognitive function. Delirium and 
dementia may represent two ends along a spectrum of cognitive impairment 
with “chronic delirium” and “reversible dementia” falling along a continuum. 
Dementia is the leading risk factor for delirium, and fully two-thirds of cases 
of delirium occur in patients with dementia. Studies have shown that delirium 
and dementia are both associated with decreased cerebral metabolism, 
cholinergic deficiency, inflammation and abnormal glucose metabolism, 
reflecting their overlapping clinical, metabolic, and cellular mechanisms. 
Delirium can alter the course of underlying dementia, with dramatic 
worsening of the trajectory of cognitive decline, resulting in more rapid 
progression of functional losses and worsened long-term outcomes including 
hospitalization and mortality. Additionally, postoperative cognitive decline 
is accelerated among patients with delirium. 


PRESENTATION 


Cardinal Features 


Acute onset and inattention are the central features of delirium. Determining 
the acuity of onset requires accurate knowledge of the patient’s prior 
cognitive status and often entails obtaining historical information from 
another close observer, such as a family member, caregiver, or nurse. With 
delirium, the mental status changes typically occur over hours to days, in 
contrast to the changes that occur with dementia, which present insidiously 
over weeks to months. Another key feature is the fluctuating course of 
delirium; symptoms tend to wax and wane in severity over a 24-hour period. 
Lucid intervals are characteristic, and the reversibility of symptoms within a 
short time can deceive even an experienced clinician. Inattention is 
manifested as difficulty focusing, maintaining, and shifting attention or 
concentration. With simple cognitive assessment, patients may display 
difficulty with straightforward repetition tasks, digit spans, or recitation of 
the months of the year backward. Delirious patients appear easily distracted, 
experience difficulty with multistep commands, cannot follow the flow of a 



conversation, and often perseverate with an answer to a previous question. 
Additional major features include a disorganization of thought and altered 
level of consciousness. Disorganized thoughts are a manifestation of 
underlying cognitive or perceptual disturbances and can be recognized by 
disjointed and incoherent speech or an unclear or illogical flow of ideas. 
Clouding of consciousness is typically manifested by lethargy, with a 
reduced awareness of the environment that may show diurnal variation. 
Although not cardinal elements, other frequently associated features include 
disorientation (more commonly to time and place than to self), cognitive 
impairments (eg, memory and problem-solving deficits, dysnomia), 
psychomotor agitation or retardation, perceptual disturbances (eg, 
hallucinations, misperceptions, illusions), paranoid delusions, emotional 
lability, and sleep-wake cycle disruption. 


Classification of Delirium 


The clinical presentation of delirium can take three main forms: hypoactive, 
hyperactive, or mixed. The hypoactive form of delirium is characterized by 
lethargy and reduced psychomotor functioning and is the more common form 
in older patients. Hypoactive delirium often goes unrecognized and carries 
an overall poorer prognosis. The reduced level of patient activity associated 
with hypoactive delirium, often attributed to low mood or fatigue, may 
contribute to its misdiagnosis or underrecognition. By contrast, the 
hyperactive form of delirium presents with symptoms of agitation, increased 
vigilance, and often concomitant hallucinations; its presentation rarely 
remains unnoticed by caregivers or clinicians. Patients can fluctuate between 
the hypoactive and hyperactive forms—the mixed type of delirium— 
presenting a challenge in distinguishing the presentation from other psychotic 
or mood disorders. Recognition of partial or subsyndromal forms of delirium 
has brought attention to the persistence of symptoms among older patients, 
particularly during the resolution stages of delirium. Partial forms of 
delirium also adversely influence long-term clinical outcomes. 


Prognosis 


Delirium is an important independent determinant of prolonged length of 
hospital stay, increased mortality, increased rates of nursing home placement, 
and functional and cognitive decline. Delirium has long been thought to be a 
reversible, transient condition; however, accumulating evidence brings this 



into question. Delirium symptoms generally persist for a month or more; as 
few as 20% of patients attain complete symptom resolution at 6-month 
follow-up. Cognitive function is impacted for up to a year following 
delirium, and patients who develop delirium are at increased risk for 
development of dementia. The chronic detrimental effects are likely related 
to the duration, severity, and underlying cause(s) of the delirium in addition 
to the baseline vulnerability of the patient. 


EVALUATION 


There are numerous instruments for the identification of delirium. Each 
delirium instrument has strengths and limitations, and the choice among them 
depends on the goals for use. The most widely used is the CAM, of which the 
four-item short form has been applied in over 10,000 studies to date and 
translated into over 19 languages. The CAM has been adapted for use in 
other settings, including the intensive care unit (CAM-ICU), nursing home 
(NH-CAM), and emergency department (CAM-ED and B-CAM). The CAMS 
derived from the CAM can be used to rate delirium severity and has 
demonstrated predictive validity for relevant clinical outcomes. Designed for 
clinicians with minimal training, several brief screening tools have been 
validated in postsurgical, medical, emergency department, and postacute care 
settings. For example, the Ultra-Brief CAM (UB-CAM) requires just 1 
minute to complete and can identify delirium with high sensitivity and 
specificity. Selected screening tools are presented inTable 58-3. These can 
be used as an initial step in delirium detection and should be followed by a 
comprehensive assessment. Additionally, family-informed tools can be 
completed by health care professionals and/or families, yielding sensitivities 
ranging from 67% to 90% and specificities ranging from 56% to 90% in 
diverse populations. 


TABLE 58-3■SELECTED DELIRIUM SCREENING TESTS

The acute evaluation of suspected or confirmed delirium centers on three 
main tasks that occur simultaneously: (1) establishing the diagnosis of 
delirium; (2) determining the potential cause(s) and ruling out life-threatening 
contributors; and (3) managing the symptoms while assuring patient safety. 
Delirium is a clinical diagnosis, relying on astute observation at the bedside, 
careful cognitive assessment, and history-taking from a knowledgeable 
informant to establish a change from the patient’s baseline functioning. 
Identifying the potentially multifactorial contributors to the delirium is of 
paramount importance. Many of these factors are treatable, and if left 
untreated, may result in substantial morbidity and mortality. Because the 
potential contributors are myriad, the search requires a thorough medical 
evaluation guided by clinical judgment. The challenge is enhanced by the 
frequently nonspecific or atypical presentation of the underlying illness in 
older persons. In fact, delirium is often the 
only sign of life-threatening 
illness, such as sepsis, pneumonia, or myocardial infarction in older persons. 


History and Physical Examination 



A thorough history and physical examination constitute the foundation of the 
medical evaluation of suspected delirium. The first step in evaluation should 
be to establish the diagnosis of delirium through careful cognitive assessment 
and to determine the acuity of change from the patient’s baseline cognitive 
state. Because cognitive impairment may easily be missed during routine 
conversation, brief cognitive screening tests, such as the Mini-Cog test or the 
UB-CAM assessment, should be used to rate the CAM. The degree of 
attention should be further assessed with simple tests such as a digit span 
(inattention indicated by an inability to repeat five digits forward or three 
digits backward) or recitation of the months of the year backward. A targeted 
history, focusing on baseline cognitive status and chronology of recent mental 
status changes, should be elicited from a reliable informant. Historical data 
including intercurrent illnesses, recent adjustments in medications, the 
possibility of withdrawal from alcohol, other substances, or medications, 
and pertinent environmental changes may elucidate precipitating factors of 
delirium. 


The physical examination should comprise detailed review focusing on 
potential etiologic clues to an underlying or inciting disease process. Vital 
sign assessment is important to identify fever, tachycardia, or decreased 
oxygen saturation, each of which may point to specific disease processes. 
Auscultatory examination may suggest pneumonia or pulmonary effusion. A 
new cardiac murmur or dysrhythmia may suggest ischemia or congestive 
heart failure. Gastrointestinal examination should focus on evidence of an 
acute abdominal process, such as occult bleeding, perforated viscus, or 
infection. Patients with delirium may also demonstrate nonspecific focal 
findings on neurologic examination, such as asterixis or tremor. New focal 
neurologic deficits should raise suspicion of an acute cerebrovascular event 
or subdural hematoma. In many older patients and especially those with 
cognitive impairment, delirium may be the initial manifestation of a serious 
new disease process. Attention to early localizing signs on serial physical 
examinations is paramount. 


A complete medication review, including over-the-counter medications, 
is critical. Any medications with known psychoactive effects should be 
discontinued or minimized whenever possible. Medications with potential 
for withdrawal should be tapered carefully. Because of pharmacodynamic 
and pharmacokinetic changes in aging adults, these medications may cause 



deleterious psychoactive effects even when prescribed at customary doses 
and with serum drug levels that are within the “therapeutic range.” 


Laboratory Tests and Imaging 


Laboratory evaluation should be guided by clinical judgment and take into 
account specific patient characteristics and historical data. A thorough 
history and physical examination, medication review, focused laboratory 
testing (eg, complete blood count, chemistries, glucose, renal and liver 
function tests, urinalysis), and search for occult infection should help to 
identify the majority of potential contributors to the delirium. Additional 
laboratory testing such as thyroid function tests, B12 level, cortisol level, 


drug levels or toxicology screen, syphilis serologies, and ammonia level 
should be based on the specific clinical presentation. Further diagnostic 
work-up with an electrocardiogram, chest radiograph, and/or arterial blood 
gas test may be appropriate for patients with pulmonary or cardiac 
conditions. The indications for cerebrospinal fluid examination, brain 
imaging, or EEG remain controversial. Their overall diagnostic yield is low, 
and these procedures are probably indicated in fewer than 5% to 10% of 
delirium cases. Lumbar puncture with cerebrospinal fluid examination is 
indicated for the febrile delirious patient when meningitis or encephalitis is 
suspected. Brain imaging (such as CT or MRI) should be reserved for cases 
with new focal neurologic signs, with history or signs of head trauma, or 
without another identifiable cause of the delirium. Of note, some neurologic 
symptoms are associated with delirium, including tremor and asterixis. EEG, 
which has a false-negative rate of 17% and a false-positive rate of 22% for 
distinguishing between delirious and nondelirious patients, plays a limited 
role and is most commonly employed to detect subclinical seizure disorders 
and to differentiate delirium from nonorganic psychiatric conditions. 


Differential Diagnosis 


Distinguishing a long-standing confusional state (dementia) from delirium 
alone, or from delirium superimposed on dementia, is an important, but often 
difficult, diagnostic step. These two conditions can be differentiated by the 
acute onset of symptoms in delirium, with dementia presenting much more 
insidiously and by the impaired attention and altered level of consciousness 
associated with delirium. 



The differential diagnosis of delirium can be extensive and includes other 
psychiatric conditions such as depression and nonorganic psychiatric 
disorders (Table 58-4). Although perceptual disturbances, such as illusions 
and hallucinations, can occur with delirium in about 15% of cases, 
recognition of the key features of acute onset, inattention, altered level of 
consciousness, and global cognitive impairment will enhance the 
identification of delirium. Differentiating among diagnoses is critical 
because delirium carries a more serious prognosis without proper evaluation 
and management. Treatment for certain conditions such as depression or 
affective disorders may involve use of drugs with anticholinergic activity, 
which could exacerbate an unrecognized case of delirium. At times, working 
through the differential diagnosis can be challenging, and the diagnosis of 
delirium may remain uncertain. Because of the potentially life-threatening 
nature of delirium, however, it is prudent to manage the patient as having 
delirium and search for underlying precipitants until further information can 
be obtained. 


TABLE 58-4■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ALTEREDMENTAL STATUS
Algorithm for the Evaluation of Altered Mental Status 



Figure 58-2 presents an algorithm for the evaluation of altered mental status 
in the older patient. The initial steps center on establishing the patient’s 
baseline cognitive functioning and the onset and timing of any cognitive 
changes. Chronic impairments, representing changes that occur over months 
to years, are most likely attributable to dementia, which should be evaluated 
accordingly (see 
Chapter 59). Acute alterations, representing abrupt 
deteriorations in mental status, occur over hours to weeks and may be 
superimposed on underlying dementia. They should be further evaluated with 
cognitive testing to establish the presence of delirium. In the absence of 
notable delirium features (see “Presentation” earlier in this chapter), 
subsequent evaluation should focus on the possibility of major depression, 
acute psychotic disorder, or other psychiatric disorders (see 
Chapters 65, 60, 
and 66). 



FIGURE 58-2. 
Flowchart 
for evaluationof suspecteddeliriuminanolder person. 
ABG,arterial 


bloodgas; 
B12,cyanocobalaminor vitaminB12 
level; 
EEG,electroencephalography; 
IM, 
intramuscular; 
LP,lumbar puncture; 
PO,bymouth; 
TFTs,thyroidfunctiontests 
(eg,T4,thyroid 
index,thyroid-stimulatinghormone); 
UB-CAM,Ultra 
Brief ConfusionAssessment 
Method. 


PREVENTION 


Primary prevention—preventing delirium before it develops—is the most 
effective strategy for reducing delirium and its associated adverse outcomes. 
Table 58-5 describes well-documented delirium risk factors and preventive 
interventions to address each risk factor. A controlled clinical trial 
demonstrated the effectiveness of a delirium prevention strategy targeted 
toward these risk factors, which were selected based on their clinical 
relevance and the degree to which they could be modified by employing 



practical and feasible interventions. Compared with standard care, 
implementation of these preventive interventions resulted in a 40% risk 
reduction for delirium in hospitalized older patients. 


TABLE 58-5■DELIRIUM RISK FACTORS AND TESTEDPREVENTATIVE INTERVENTIONS

The Hospital Elder Life Program (HELP; now AGS CoCare HELP at 
https://help.agscocare.org/) represents an innovative strategy of hospital care 
for older patients, designed to incorporate the tested delirium prevention 
strategies and to improve overall quality of hospital care. Programs such as 



HELP underscore the importance of an interdisciplinary team’s contributions 
to the prevention of delirium. For example, trained volunteers and family 
members can play roles in daily orientation, therapeutic recreation activities, 
and feeding assistance. Physical rehabilitation experts and nurses can assist 
with mobilization and the incorporation of daily exercises to prevent 
functional decline. Dietitians can help to maximize appropriate caloric intake 
and oral hydration in acutely ill patients. Consultant pharmacists, chaplains, 
and social workers also may provide specialized expertise to address issues 
pertinent to individuals at risk for delirium. 


At least 14 studies have examined primary prevention with 
nonpharmacologic multicomponent approaches to delirium in controlled 
trials with prospective sampling frameworks and validated delirium 
assessments. These studies applied multifactorial interventions or 
educational strategies targeted toward health care professionals, staff, and 
families, and demonstrated significant reductions in delirium rates, inhospital 
falls, health care–associated costs, and/or duration of delirium. 
Proactive geriatric consultation has been demonstrated to reduce the risk of 
delirium post hip fracture by 40% in a randomized controlled trial. Another 
trial found that home rehabilitation after acute hospitalization of older adults 
was associated with lower risk of delirium and greater patient satisfaction, 
when compared with an institutional setting. In all, trials suggest that up to 
50% of cases of delirium may be preventable and that prevention strategies 
should begin early during hospitalization. 


Preventive efforts for delirium will require system-wide changes and 
large-scale shifts in local and national policies and approaches to care. 
Recommended changes include routine cognitive and functional assessments 
on admission of all older patients, beginning in the emergency department 
setting; monitoring mental status as a “vital sign”; education of physicians 
and nurses to improve recognition and heighten awareness of the clinical 
implications; enhanced geriatric physician and nursing expertise; incentives 
to change practice patterns that lead to delirium (eg, immobilization, use of 
deliriogenic medications, bladder catheters, and physical restraints); and 
creation of systems that enhance high-quality geriatric care (eg, geriatric 
expertise, medication review, family involvement, case management, clinical 
pathways, and quality monitoring for delirium). 


MANAGEMENT 



Overview 


The recommended management approach for all delirious patients begins 
with nonpharmacologic strategies, which usually result in successful 
symptom amelioration. In selected cases, such strategies must be 
supplemented with a pharmacologic approach, reserved for patients in whom 
delirium symptoms would result in interruption of needed medical therapies 
(eg, mechanical ventilation, central lines) or may endanger the safety of the 
patient or other persons. However, prescribing any drug requires balancing 
the benefits of delirium management against the potential for adverse 
medication effects because sedative drugs may prolong delirium and worsen 
clinical outcomes. The clinical team, family, and caregivers should 
understand that the choice of almost any medication may further cloud the 
patient’s mental status, prolong delirium symptoms, and obscure efforts to 
monitor the course of the mental status change. Any drug should be initiated 
at the lowest starting dose for the shortest time possible. 


Nonpharmacologic Management 


Nonpharmacologic approaches are the mainstays of prevention and treatment 
for every delirious patient. These include strategies for reorientation and 
behavioral intervention, such as ensuring the presence of family members, 
use of sitters, and transferring a disruptive patient to a private room or closer 
to the nurse’s station for increased supervision. Orienting influences such as 
calendars, clocks, and the day’s schedule should be prominently displayed, 
along with familiar personal objects from the patient’s home environment 
(eg, photographs and religious artifacts). Personal contact and 
communication are critical to reinforce patient awareness and encourage 
patient participation as much as possible. Communication should incorporate 
repeated reorientation strategies, clear instructions, and frequent eye contact. 
Correction of sensory impairments (ie, vision and hearing) should be 
maximized as applicable for individual patients by encouraging the use of 
eyeglasses and hearing aids during the hospital stay. Mobility and 
independence should be promoted; physical restraints should be avoided 
because they lead to decreased mobility, increased agitation, and greater risk 
of injury and worsening delirium. Patient involvement in self-care and 
decision making should also be encouraged. Other environmental 
interventions include limiting room and staff changes and providing a quiet 
patient care setting with low-level lighting at night. An environment with 



decreased noise allowing for an uninterrupted period for sleep at night is of 
crucial importance in the management of delirium. This may require unitwide 
changes in the coordination of nursing and medical procedures, 
including medication dispensing, vital sign recording, and administration of 
intravenous medications and other treatments. Hospital-wide changes may be 
needed to ensure a low level of noise at night, including minimizing hallway 
noise, overhead paging, and staff conversations. Family involvement in 
nonpharmacologic management of delirium is critical and has been shown to 
reduce length of stay and ameliorate anxiety in family members. 


Nonpharmacologic Sleep Protocol 


Nonpharmacologic approaches for relaxation and sleep can be effective for 
management of agitation in delirious patients and for prevention of delirium 
through minimization of psychoactive medications. The nonpharmacologic 
sleep protocol includes three components: (1) a glass of warm milk or herbal 
tea, (2) relaxation music or tapes, and (3) back massage. This protocol was 
demonstrated to be feasible and effective, reducing use of sleeping 
medications from 54% to 31% in a hospital environment. 


Antipsychotics 


As a last resort, antipsychotics are the preferred agents for pharmacologic 
treatment of delirium. Haloperidol is the agent with the longest track record, 
although its use may be complicated by extrapyramidal side effects and acute 
dystonias. Many trials examining the efficacy of haloperidol and the atypical 
antipsychotics (such as quetiapine, risperidone, and olanzapine) have been 
low quality and/or inconclusive, with no effect on delirium duration, 
severity, relief of symptoms, length of stay or mortality. A recent placebocontrolled, 
randomized trial of haloperidol and ziprasidone in the intensive 
care setting similarly failed to show a benefit for these medications. 
Comparisons across antipsychotics have not found superior efficacy of any 
one agent. Additionally, there is evidence that antipsychotic drugs may 
prolong delirium and result in poor clinical outcomes. Moreover, official 
warnings have been issued regarding the increased mortality associated with 
the use of haloperidol and atypical antipsychotics in patients with dementia. 
Use of antipsychotics should be avoided in patients with Parkinson disease 
and Lewy body dementia. 



If proceeding with antipsychotic administration, the intravenous route 
should be reserved for monitored settings due to the risk of torsades and 
sudden death. Parenteral administration is required in cases where rapid 
onset of action is required with short duration of action, whereas oral or 
intramuscular use is associated with a more optimal duration of action. The 
recommended starting dose is 0.25 mg of haloperidol orally or parenterally. 
The dose may be repeated every 30 minutes after vital signs have been 
rechecked. The clinical end point should be an awake but manageable 
patient, a goal that can be achieved by following the geriatric prescribing 
principle, “start low and go slow.” Most older patients naïve to prior 
treatment with an antipsychotic should require a total loading dose of no 
more than 2.5 mg of haloperidol. A subsequent maintenance dose consisting 
of one-half of the loading dose should be administered in divided doses over 
the next 24 hours, with doses tapered over the ensuing 48 hours as the 
agitation resolves. Alternatively, an atypical antipsychotic may be 
considered at a low starting dose: quetiapine (starting dose, 12.5 mg; 24-h 
maximum, 25 mg), olanzapine (starting dose, 2.5 mg; 24-h maximum, 10 mg), 
or risperidone (0.25–0.5 mg; 24-h maximum, 1.5 mg). Patients should be 
reevaluated continually to assess for ongoing need and tapered off as soon as 
possible. 


Other Pharmacologic Approaches 


Benzodiazepines (eg, lorazepam) are not recommended as first-line agents in 
the treatment of delirium because of their propensity to cause oversedation 
and to exacerbate acute mental status changes. However, they remain the 
treatment of choice for delirium caused by seizures and alcohol- and 
medication-related withdrawal syndromes. While other drugs have been 
advocated for use in treatment of delirium, evaluation of their use has 
resulted in discrepant findings, and there is no consensus recommendation for 
their general use. Trials of the sedative dexmedetomidine in ventilated ICU 
patients found a reduction in delirium duration and length of ICU stay as well 
as better effectiveness and safety in haloperidol-resistant patients. Clonidine, 
an α2-agonist, has been shown to be safe, though no effect was detected on 
delirium. In randomized trials of melatonin and the melatonin receptor 
agonist ramelteon, the results have been mixed to date. Overall, data does not 
support the use of pharmacologic management of delirium, although the 
consensus in the field is for a limited role of medications for the treatment of 



intractable distress and agitation in which nonpharmacologic strategies have 
failed. 


SPECIAL ISSUES 


COVID-19 


The arrival of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and associated COVID-19 in early 
2020 has culminated in a global health crisis. Although COVID-19 typically 
manifests as an influenza-like respiratory illness, early reports of neurologic 
symptoms included altered mental status. In one study of older adults 
presenting to the emergency department with COVID-19, delirium was the 
sixth most common presenting symptom, and in some cases occurred without 
the typical symptoms of COVID-19. Rates of delirium during hospitalization 
with COVID-19 range from 25% to 84%. Delirium may be more severe or 
prolonged due to social isolation and use of personal protective equipment, 
resulting in poor communication, reduced social interactions, limited 
reorienting of patients, and prolonged need for mechanical ventilation, with 
increased immobilization, depth of sedation, or use of second-line 
medications due to drug shortages. Nonpharmacologic interventions for 
delirium prevention have been adapted for COVID-19 and are available 
online athttps://help.agscocare.org/chapterabstract/
chapter/H00107/H00107_PART001_002. 


Patient Preference and Decision Making 


Given acute fluctuations in attention and decision-making capacity, delirium 
presents formidable challenges to the ethical care of affected patients (see 
Chapters 7 and 26). Cognitive assessments in patients with suspected 
delirium help to ensure that patients can be involved in decision making 
whenever possible and that appropriate surrogate decision makers are 
involved in representing a patient’s wishes and understanding the risks and 
benefits of procedures and treatments. Because the patient may exhibit 
periods of lucidity in delirium, there may be times during which the decisionmaking 
and informed consent process can and must involve the patient. The 
clinician should be cognizant of ongoing subclinical manifestations of 
delirium, which may be important for both the long-term management and 
decision-making capacity of the patient. 


Nursing Home Setting 



For the postacute population receiving short-term rehabilitative care, 
persistent delirium after an acute hospitalization is a major concern. Prior 
studies demonstrated that 16% of admissions to postacute care met full CAM 
criteria for delirium, while another 50% demonstrated signs of subsyndromal 
delirium. Patients with delirium on admission to postacute care experience 
more complications such as falls, higher rehospitalization rates, and higher 
mortality. Of those admitted to postacute care with delirium, over 50% are 
still delirious 1 month later. Persistence of delirium prevents functional 
recovery in the postacute setting; only those patients whose delirium cleared 
within 2 weeks of admission recovered to their prehospitalization functional 
status. Persistent delirium is also associated with higher mortality. 


The long-term care population represents a high-risk group for delirium, 
with a high prevalence of dementia and functional impairments. Incident 
delirium is common in this population, frequently heralding the onset of an 
acute illness that results in hospitalization and/or death. Nursing staffing 
ratios, high turnover, competing concerns, and the high prevalence of 
dementia make identification and prevention of delirium challenging in this 
setting. Nonetheless, these patients represent among the most vulnerable of 
older adults, and further attention to delirium in this setting is warranted. 
Research in long-term care settings is challenging, and results are mixed in 
this area. A recent trial involving nonpharmacologic delirium prevention 
strategies in the nursing home setting did not prevent delirium or reduce 
delirium symptoms, with greater than expected improvement in both 
intervention and usual care groups. This finding underscores the need for 
further research into effective delirium prevention strategies in this setting. 


Palliative and End-of-Life Care 


Because delirium occurs in more than 80% of patients at the end of life, it is 
considered nearly inevitable in the terminal stages by most hospice care 
providers and may serve as a marker of approaching death. Establishing 
goals of care with the patient and family is a crucial step, including 
discussions about the potential causes of the delirium, intensity of medical 
evaluations considered appropriate, and the potential trade-off between 
alertness and adequate control of pain and agitation. Some patients may wish 
to preserve their ability to communicate as long as possible, while others 
may focus on comfort perhaps at the expense of alertness. Physicians must be 
cognizant that even in the terminal phase, many causes of delirium are 



potentially reversible, and may be amenable to interventions (eg, medication 
adjustments, treatment of dehydration, hypoglycemia, or hypoxia) that may 
improve comfort and quality of life. However, the burdens of evaluation or 
treatment (eg, reduction in narcotic dose) may not be consistent with the 
goals for care. In all cases, symptom management should begin immediately, 
while evaluation is underway. Nonpharmacologic approaches should be 
instituted in all patients, with pharmacologic approaches for selected cases. 
Haloperidol remains the first-line therapy for delirium in terminally ill 
patients, although a recent randomized controlled trial did not support its use. 
In end-of-life care, sedation may be indicated as an additional therapy for 
management of severe agitated delirium in the terminally ill patient, which 
can cause considerable distress for the patient and family. Because sedation 
poses the risks of decreased meaningful interaction with family, increased 
confusion, and respiratory depression, this choice should be made in 
conjunction with the family according to the goals of care. If sedation is 
indicated, an agent that is short acting and easily titrated to effect is 
recommended. Lorazepam (starting dose 0.5–1.0 mg PO, IV, or SQ) is the 
recommended agent of choice. 


FURTHERREADING
American Geriatrics Society 2019 Beers Criteria Update Expert Panel. 
American Geriatrics Society 2019 updated Beers criteria for potentially 
inappropriate medication use in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2019;67;674–694. 


American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Association; 2013. 


Fong TG, Davis D, Growdon ME, et al. The interface of delirium and 
dementia in older persons. Lancet Neurol. 2015;14:823–832. 


Fong TG, Jones RN, Marcantonio ER, et al. Adverse outcomes after 
hospitalization and delirium in persons with Alzheimer disease. Ann 
Intern Med. 2012;156:848–856. 


Girard TD, Exline MC, Carson SS, et al. Haloperidol and ziprasidone for 
treatment of delirium in critical illness. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:2506– 
2516. 



Hshieh TT, Yue J, Oh E, et al. Effectiveness of multi-component nonpharmacologic 
delirium interventions: a systematic review and metaanalysis. 
JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175:512–520. 


Inouye SK, Bogardus ST Jr, Charpentier PA, et al. A clinical trial of a 
multicomponent intervention to prevent delirium in hospitalized older 
patients. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:669–676. 


Inouye SK, Charpentier PA. Precipitating factors for delirium in hospitalized 
elderly persons: predictive model and inter-relationship with baseline 
vulnerability. JAMA. 1996;275:852–857. 


Inouye SK, Marcantonio ER, Kosar CM, et al. The short- and long-term 
relationship between delirium and cognitive trajectory in older surgical 
patients. Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers Assoc. 2016;12:766–775. 


Inouye SK, van Dyck CH, Alessi CA, et al. Clarifying confusion: the 
confusion assessment method. A new method for detection of delirium. 
Ann Intern Med. 1990;113: 941–948. 


Inouye SK, Westendorp RGJ, Saczynski J. Delirium in elderly people. 
Lancet. 2014;383:911–922. 


Leslie DL, Marcantonio ER, Zhang Y, et al. One-year health care costs 
associated with delirium in the elderly population. Arch Intern Med. 
2008;168:27–32. 


Marcantonio ER. Delirium in hospitalized older adults. N Engl J Med. 
2017;377:1456–1466. 


Marcantonio ER, Flacker JM, Wright RJ, et al. Reducing delirium after hip 
fracture: a randomized trial. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2001;49:516–522. 


Marcantonio ER, Goldman L, Mangione CM, et al. A clinical prediction rule 
for delirium after elective non-cardiac surgery. JAMA. 1994;271:134– 
139. 


Motyl CM, Ngo L, Zhou W, et al. Comparative accuracy and efficiency of 
four delirium screening protocols. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2020;68:2572– 
2578. 


Oh ES, Fong TG, Hshieh TT, Inouye SK. Delirium in older persons: 
advances in diagnosis and treatment (systematic review). JAMA. 
2017;318:1161–1174. 


Oh ES, Needham DM, Nikooie R, et al. Antipsychotics for preventing 
delirium in hospitalized adults: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med. 
2019;171:474–484. 



O’Mahony R, Murthy L, Akunne A, Young J. Synopsis of the National 
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guideline for prevention of 
delirium. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:746–751. 


Saczynski JS, Marcantonio ER, Quach L, et al. Cognitive trajectories after 
post-operative delirium. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:30–39. 


Wilson JE, Mart MF, Cunningham C, et al. Delirium. Nat Rev Dis Primer. 
2020;6:1–26. 



Chapter 


DementiaIncludingAlzheimerDisease 


Cynthia M. 
Carlsson, 
Nathaniel 
A. 
Chin, 
Carey 
E. 
Gleason, 
Luigi 
Puglielli, 
Sanjay 
Asthana 


Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disorder 
affecting older adults, projected to affect more than 13 million Americans 
and 115 million individuals worldwide by 2050. Compared to projections in 
high-income countries, the number of individuals with AD in low- and 
middle-income nations is increasing at an even greater rate. The disease is 
characterized by diffuse functional and structural abnormalities in the brain 
that lead to progressive cognitive and behavioral deficits and functional 
decline. AD is associated with significant morbidity and mortality and is 
currently the sixth most common cause of death in the United States. The 
physical, psychological, functional, and socioeconomic impact of AD 
substantially affects the well-being and quality of life of patients and their 
caregivers. Caring for patients with AD places heavy financial burden on 
patients, families, communities, and the health care system at large. In the 
United States in 2020, the average lifetime cost of caring for a person with 
AD exceeded $350,000. The total cost of caring for Americans with AD 
exceeds $355 billion annually. Evidence is beginning to emerge on the 
economic impact of dementia care in low- and middle-income countries as 
most of the costs in these nations are related to informal care. 


Recognizing the enormity of the burden of AD, international 
collaborations between clinicians, researchers, policy makers, patient 
advocacy groups, the media, and many others have increased public 
awareness of the global impact of the disease and have laid the foundation 
for the development of effective preventive and therapeutic strategies as well 
as improvements in care management for patients with AD. An example of 



such a coordinated effort is the 2011 United States National Alzheimer’s 
Project Act (NAPA), a law designed to create and maintain an integrated 
national plan to address AD. The plan encompasses federal coordination of 
AD research and services and aims to improve early diagnosis and 
coordination of care, accelerate development of effective treatments, 
promote health equity in AD care among ethnic and racial minority 
populations, and stimulate coordination with international groups to address 
AD globally. Such national and international collaborations will help 
accelerate optimal diagnosis and care of patients at risk for AD and related 
dementias. Another example is the public health prevention effort underway 
to address 12 recognized modifiable risk factors that contribute to dementia 
and recommend policy interventions to mitigate these risks. In the United 
States, this is the focus of the Alzheimer’s Association’s Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention: Building Our Largest Dementia (BOLD) Public 
Health Center of Excellence on Dementia Risk Reduction supported by the 
BOLD Infrastructure for Alzheimer’s Act—PL115-406. 


LearningObjectives
■ 
Describe 
the 
currentdiagnostic 
criteria 
for dementia,Alzheimer disease 
(AD),andmildcognitive 
impairment 
(MCI),andhow 
these 
conditions 
differ fromnormalcognitive 
aging. 
■ 
Understandthe 
effects 
of age 
andother genetic 
andnongenetic 
riskfactors 
onriskof developing 
AD. 
■ 
Identifykeyneuropathologic 
features 
andmechanistic 
pathways 
associatedwithAD. 
■ 
Recognize 
commonreversible 
causes 
of cognitive 
dysfunction. 
■ 
Describe 
aneffective 
dementia 
care 
managementplanacross 
care 
settings 
andstages 
of disease, 
integratinguse 
of pharmacologic 
andnonpharmacologic 
interventions,education,andcommunity 
resources. 
KeyClinicalPoints
1. 
AD is the most common neurodegenerative disorder affecting 
older adults with prevalence rates increasing with advancing age. 
2. 
While aging is the most established risk factor for late-onset AD, 
various other genetic, lifestyle, and environmental factors also 
influence dementia risk. 

3. 
The diagnostic evaluation for dementia, AD, and MCI depends 
heavily on a careful assessment of an individual’s change in 
functional status, a structured cognitive assessment, a thorough 
clinical examination, and exclusion of other competing causes of 
cognitive decline. 
4. 
There are currently no proven preventive or disease-modifying 
therapies for AD; however, aducanumab is the first FDAapproved 
medication that reduces amyloid burden in the brain, 
but without significant improvement in cognition. The current 
standard-of-care management plans integrate use of 
pharmacologic therapies to delay symptom progression; 
nonpharmacologic strategies to optimize function, behavior, and 
safety; and education and support for patients and their care 
partners. 
5. 
Advanced care planning prior to loss of decisional capacity is of 
critical importance in developing patient-centered goals of care 
in persons with cognitive impairment. 
DEFINITION 


In defining AD features, it is widely recognized that the clinical cognitive 
and behavioral signs and symptoms do not always correlate with the degree 
of AD neuropathologic changes noted in the brain. The discrepancy between 
the neuropathologic changes and the individual clinical expression of disease 
is likely related to additional unidentified physiologic, metabolic, or genetic 
factors that either accelerate or slow cognitive decline. For example, some 
older adults with normal cognitive function just prior to death have been 
found to have significant AD neuropathology on autopsy. These individuals 
may have unrecognized neuroprotective factors that help preserve cognitive 
function despite notable neuropathologic changes. Thus, in order to 
disentangle the clinical syndrome from the neuropathologic changes, the 
current AD core clinical criteria are distinct from the AD neuropathologic 
guidelines, yet encourage clinicians and researchers to postulate the most 
likely neuropathology underlying the clinical presentation of disease. 



In 2011, the National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer’s Association 
(NIA-AA) released cosponsored revised clinical diagnostic guidelines for 
dementia, dementia due to AD, MCI, and a theoretical framework for 
defining the preclinical stages of AD. Core clinical diagnostic criteria for 
dementia, AD, and MCI were designed for use in all clinical settings and are 
summarized inTables 59-1 and 59-2. In 2013, the American Psychiatric 
Association published the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Within this edition, the term “dementia” 
was replaced with “major neurocognitive disorder” and the term “mild 
cognitive impairment” with “mild neurocognitive disorder.” While the DSM5 
and NIA-AA terminologies differ, the diagnostic criteria for major 
neurocognitive disorder and dementia as well as those for mild 
neurocognitive disorder and MCI are nearly identical (see 
Tables 59-1 and 
59-2) and, thus, in most circumstances are interchangeable. For simplicity, 
this chapter uses the terms “dementia” and “MCI.” 


TABLE 59-1■NIA-AA CORE CLINICAL DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIAFOR ALL-CAUSE DEMENTIA AND DEMENTIA DUE TOALZHEIMER DISEASE

EPIDEMIOLOGY 


AD is the most common cause of dementia in older adults, currently affecting 
more than 6 million Americans. Worldwide more than 44 million individuals 
currently have AD or a related dementia. Unless effective preventive 
strategies are identified, it is anticipated that the prevalence of AD will 
double every 20 years. The United Nations predicts that the major rate of 
increase in the prevalence of AD will likely occur in developing countries 
that may not possess the essential resources, public health support system, or 
medical expertise to care for patients with AD. There is clear evidence that a 



number of risk factors significantly enhance the overall risk for developing 
AD. These risk factors relate to both genetic and nongenetic markers and are 
discussed below. 


Aging 


Age is the single most important and validated risk factor for AD. 
Epidemiologic studies indicate that the incidence and prevalence of AD both 
increase with age. Based on data from the 2010 US Census, the prevalence of 
AD was approximately 3% among adults between the ages of 65 to 74, 17% 
in persons aged 75 to 84, and 32% in individuals age 85 and older. With the 
average human lifespan increasing, the prevalence of AD is expected to 
accelerate at an even greater rate in coming decades. Although not clearly 
understood, converging research findings provide clues concerning the 
potential molecular pathway(s) underlying the association between aging and 
AD. Increases in the pathologic hallmarks of AD, notably amyloid plaques 
and neurofibrillary tangles, have been noted in the brains of older adults. 


Age-related changes in molecular pathways involving insulin-like growth 
factor 1 receptor (IGF1-R), neurotrophin signaling, β-site amyloid precursor 
protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), and amyloid precursor protein (APP) 
metabolism may account for some of the increase in incidence and 
prevalence of AD with aging. Additionally, aging and IGF1-R signaling are 
both associated with cerebrovascular dysfunction, which may play a key role 
in the development of AD. An increased exposure time to age-dependent 
vascular risk factors or an interaction between aging and vascular risk 
factors may in part account for the effects of aging on the pathobiology of 
AD. 


Apolipoprotein E Genotype 


Late-onset AD is the most common form of the disorder, accounting for 
greater than 95% of all AD cases. Although some cases of younger-onset AD 
have strong links to the genes coding for 
APP and presenilin 1 (PSEN1) and 
2 (PSEN2) proteins, many cases of late-onset AD are seen in individuals 
without any clear genetic predisposition. A common polymorphism in the 
apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene is the major determinant of risk in families 
with late-onset AD. Of the three allelic forms (ε2, ε3, and ε4), AD risk is 
increased fourfold in individuals with at least one 
ε4 allele and 12-fold in 
persons with two copies of the 
ε4 allele. While 
ε4 genotype modifies an 



individual’s risk of the disease, by itself it is neither necessary nor sufficient 
for the development of AD. In the Framingham study, 55% ofε4 homozygote 
carriers, 27% ofε4 heterozygote carriers, and 9% of noncarriers developed 
AD by age 85. APOE ε4 genotype may contribute to AD by influencing 
processes related to the development of AD, including altering the rate of 
production, clearance, or aggregation of amyloid β-peptide and/or 
influencing cerebral cholesterol metabolism and inflammation. 


Vascular Risk Factors 


Midlife vascular risk factors, including hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, 
diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome, obesity, and physical inactivity, have 
all been associated with a greater risk of developing AD in later life. High 
midlife total cholesterol and blood pressure levels are associated with a 
two- to nearly threefold increased risk of developing AD decades later and 
may convey an even greater risk than that caused byAPOE ε4 allele. 
Abnormal cholesterol metabolism is related to APOE ε4 allele, suggesting 
that some of the adverse effects of this genotype on AD risk may be partially 
mediated through lipoprotein dysregulation. In a community-based cohort 
study, higher glucose levels were associated with an increased risk of 
dementia in populations both with and without diabetes mellitus. Metabolic 
syndrome is also associated with increased risk for AD, although this cluster 
of risk factors is more consistently related to greater risk of vascular 
dementia. Midlife obesity (RR 1.60, 95% CI 1.34–1.92) and physical 
inactivity (RR 1.82, 95% CI 1.19–2.78) are interrelated and both 
independently increase the risk for developing AD in late life. With more 
than 35% of current US adults meeting criteria for obesity, there is concern 
that this risk factor could further accelerate projected increases in AD 
incidence rates over the coming decades. 


Studies support that vascular factors exert an independent additive effect 
on AD risk. The presence of multiple cardiovascular risk factors at midlife 
substantially increases the risk of late-life dementia in a dose-dependent 
manner. The positive corollary to these findings is that about a third of AD 
cases worldwide might be attributable to potentially modifiable risk factors, 
thus, providing a target for preventive strategies. Vascular risk factors exert 
their adverse effects on AD pathology through a variety of mechanisms, 
including modulation of β-amyloid (Aβ) metabolism, effects on insulin 
receptors, blood-brain barrier (BBB) integrity, endothelial dysfunction, and 



cerebral blood flow. These vascular-mediated changes subsequently lead to 
tissue hypoxia, increased oxidative stress, inflammation, and cognitive 
decline. 


Traumatic Brain Injury 


There is increasing epidemiologic evidence that moderate or severe 
traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a risk factor for AD in late life and may 
precipitate earlier onset of the disease. In longitudinal studies, the magnitude 
of AD risk increases with TBI severity. Compared to controls, World War II 
veterans with moderate TBI were twice as likely to develop AD, whereas 
the risk was fourfold in veterans with severe TBI with loss of consciousness. 
Neuropathologic examination of brains from patients with a history of head 
trauma generally reveals changes of diffuse amyloid plaques together with 
tau pathology, inflammatory response, and loss of cholinergic neurons. These 
pathologic changes may be related to transient upregulation of BACE1 
together with increased generation of Aβ. These features are accompanied by 
tau hyperphosphorylation and increased caspase-mediated cleavage of APP. 
Thus, head trauma may lead to AD by triggering accelerated 
neurodegeneration. 


Newer evidence demonstrates that recurrent mild TBI, including both 
concussive and subconcussive injuries, may also contribute to future risk of 
cognitive decline. However, it has been difficult to establish risk estimates of 
the impact of repetitive mild TBI on risk for AD due to a variety of 
methodologic challenges. The high frequency of concussive and 
subconcussive injuries, the variability in definitions and measurements of 
mild TBI, the heterogeneity of injuries among various cohorts (ie, military 
combat veterans vs contact sport athletes), and selection and recall biases 
have complicated research of this area. Repetitive concussive injuries may 
also lead to chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), a condition that is 
neuropathologically distinct from AD. Symptoms of CTE frequently include 
headaches and disturbances in attention or concentration and depression— 
Chapter 64 provides additional details on CTE. Research is underway to 
clarify the varying types and severity of TBI and the effects of such injuries 
on risk for posttraumatic neurodegeneration. 


Depression 



More than 30% of patients with AD develop depression during the course of 
their illness, and some may present with depressive symptoms as their first 
clinical manifestation of underlying AD. While depression has long been 
recognized as a common psychiatric condition in older adults that may mimic 
dementia, depression is likely also a risk factor for AD. Findings of a metaanalysis 
involving over 20 population-based prospective studies supported 
an increased risk of AD in patients with a history of late-life depression 
(pooled risk OR [95% CI] 1.65 [1.42–1.92]). To date, the precise 
mechanisms underlying the association between depression and enhanced 
AD risk are unknown. Several potential mechanisms have been proposed that 
are common to both AD and depression, including elevated levels of 
cytokines, increased vascular risk factors, and the potential role ofAPOE4 
allele. More research is needed to better understand the biological basis of 
increased risk of AD in patients with a history of depression. 


Race and Ethnicity 


The assessment of differences in AD prevalence rates across geographic 
regions worldwide and among various racial and ethnic groups has proven to 
be challenging. Differences in education, literacy, life expectancy, access to 
health care, nutrition, social stressors, vascular risk factors, and cultural 
beliefs in what is considered normal aging can all influence AD prevalence 
estimates. In the Indianapolis/Ibadan studies, the incidence and prevalence of 
AD were significantly lower among Africans in Ibadan, Nigeria, than among 
age-matched African Americans in Indianapolis, suggesting that differences 
in environmental factors may play a larger role than race in influencing the 
development of AD. The significant influence of environmental factors on 
AD risk is also supported by data showing that migrant populations tend to 
have dementia rates that fall between those seen in their homeland and 
adopted countries. Standardized approaches to case ascertainment of 
dementia and statistical comparisons across nations have been implemented 
to better assess variations in prevalence rates among low-, middle-, and 
high-income countries. These approaches have produced age-adjusted 
dementia prevalence estimates of approximately 5% to 9% in people older 
than age 60 across global regions. 


Studies assessing ethnic and racial variations in dementia rates within 
countries have identified some group differences in AD incidence and 
prevalence. In a population-based study in the Washington Heights and 



Inwood communities of New York City, the cumulative incidence of AD was 
increased twofold among individuals of African-American and Caribbean 
Hispanic origin. The group differences in AD incidence did not change 
following corrections for differences in years of education or history of 
vascular risk factors. In a study in Houston, Texas, both the incidence and 
prevalence of AD were higher among older African-American and Hispanic 
individuals compared to non-Hispanic White adults. In Singapore, ethnic 
Malays and Indians had higher rates of dementia compared to ethnic Chinese, 
independent of vascular risk factors. While some research suggests there may 
be biological or genetic differences driving variations in AD risk, other 
studies support that these racial and ethnic group differences will not persist 
after rigorously accounting for important social, cultural, and environmental 
factors influencing risk of dementia. 


Education 


Low educational attainment, poor educational quality, and illiteracy have 
been shown to be associated with increased risk for AD. In a meta-analysis 
of 13 cohort and six case-control studies, low education had a pooled 
relative risk (RR) estimate for AD of 1.80 (95% CI 1.45–2.27) compared to 
high education, although the estimate from cohort studies (RR 1.59 [95% CI 
1.35–1.86]) was significantly lower than the estimate based on case-control 
studies (2.40, [1.32–4.38]). Prospective cohort studies likely provide a more 
accurate assessment of the association between education and dementia since 
they allow for documentation of a decline from a previous level of cognitive 
performance. Some studies have found that education may be a marker of 
cognitive reserve as it modifies the association between AD neuropathology 
and level of cognitive function. For the same degree of brain pathology, 
persons with higher education demonstrate less cognitive impairment. In 
addition, higher levels of education may help individuals cope more 
effectively with cognitive changes. Access to higher levels of education may 
also be a marker of socioeconomic status, coexisting chronic diseases, 
access to health care resources, and premorbid intellectual abilities. Thus, 
while low educational attainment is associated with increased AD risk, it is 
not clear to what extent low education contributes to AD or whether early 
educational interventions will protect against the development of dementia. 


Gender 



