There is some evidence that AD is more common among women, although 
study results are conflicting. In population-based studies, more than half 
reported a greater risk of AD in women, while the others found no 
difference. Some data support that estrogen deficiency following menopause 
may contribute to the development of AD; however, the effect of hormone 
replacement therapy on cognition remains controversial. The discrepant 
findings between studies assessing sex-based variations in dementia risk are 
likely due to methodologic differences in accounting for potential genderrelated 
variability in life-expectancy, education, occupation, and lifestyle 
factors that can directly affect AD risk. 


PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 


Genetics of Alzheimer Disease 


Based on the onset of symptoms, AD is normally divided into two groups: 
younger-onset (< 65 years) and late-onset (> 65 years) disease. Youngeronset 
patients include individuals with familial AD which accounts for 
between 1% and 5% of all AD cases and to date has been linked to mutations 
in the genes for the APP (gene name 
APP) on chromosome 21, presenilin 1 
(PS1; gene name 
PSEN1) on chromosome 14, and presenilin 2 (PS2; gene 
name 
PSEN2) on chromosome 1. Among these genes, more than 250 different 
mutations have so far been identified, accounting for approximately 40% of 
all cases of familial AD, yet only 0.5% of AD cases overall. Most of the 
mutations (~ 200) are found in the 
PSEN1 gene and account for 78% of the 
familial AD mutations. APP mutations (~ 33) account for about 18% of 
younger-onset autosomal dominant cases and PSEN2 (~ 22 mutations) for 
about 4%. Familial AD is characterized by younger onset of cognitive 
symptoms (typically in the late 40s or early 50s), but is clinically 
indistinguishable from late-onset AD. 


Late-onset AD, also called sporadic AD, accounts for greater than 95% 
of all cases of the disease. APOE is the only established susceptibility gene 
consistently found associated with late-onset AD in both case-control and 
genetic studies. APOE maps to chromosome 19 in a cluster with the genes 
encoding translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 40 (TOMM40), 
apolipoprotein C1, and apolipoprotein C2. The 
APOE gene exists as three 
major alleles (ε2, ε3, and ε4) that encode three different ApoE isoforms: 
ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4. Interestingly, these isoforms only differ in 



amino acid sequences at either position 112 or 158 of the protein. The 
inheritance of the ε4 allele confers an increased risk for developing AD, 
while the ε2 allele confers protection. For example, presence of one copy of 
the ε4 allele increases risk of AD fourfold, whereas inheritance of two 
copies enhances the risk by 12-fold. However, unlike genetic mutations 
associated with familial AD, the presence ofAPOE ε4 alone is insufficient to 
cause AD without additional factors. Even though the first report of an 
association betweenAPOE ε4 and AD was published decades ago, the 
precise molecular mechanisms underlying this association still remain 
elusive. It is currently unknown if the 
APOE4 allele influences the rate of 
production, clearance, or aggregation of Aβ peptide or whether it influences 
cholesterol metabolism and inflammation that reportedly play a major role in 
the pathobiology of AD. 


With the advent of genome-wide association studies (GWASs), a number 
of new genetic loci with genome-wide significance have been identified. In 
addition to APOE4, more than 40 other polymorphisms have been associated 
with increased risk for late-onset AD. However, none of these associations 
has been uniformly confirmed in every population group studied to date. 
Over 20 genetic loci have been associated with late-onset AD, leading to 
four main mechanisms: Aβ metabolism, lipid metabolism, immune response, 
and cell signaling. Further research is needed to clarify the impact of other 
genetic changes on AD risk, genetic-environmental interactions, and the 
impact of such genetic factors on mechanisms of neurodegeneration and 
neuroprotection. 


Neuropathology of Alzheimer Disease 


The neuropathologic hallmarks of AD include amyloid plaques, 
neurofibrillary tangles, and neuritic plaques (Figure 59-1). The latter are a 
subset of amyloid plaques that are closely associated with neuronal injury 
and occur with dystrophic neurites. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) 
frequently co-occurs with amyloid plaques, resulting from deposition of Aβ 
into cerebral vessels. Sporadic CAA is observed in 80% to 90% of AD 
patients and may cause lobar intracerebral hemorrhages and microbleeds. 
Together these processes contribute to loss of neurons and synapses in the 
neocortex, hippocampus, and other subcortical regions of the brain. The 
predominance of amyloid plaques versus neurofibrillary tangles or amyloid 
angiopathy can differ from one patient to another. However, 



neuronal/synaptic loss is a constant feature and eventually the direct cause of 
dementia. The distribution of the disease pathology seems to follow a regionspecific 
pattern with amyloid plaques being more prevalent in the neocortex 
and neuronal/synaptic loss being more prevalent in the hippocampus, 
posterior cingulate, and corpus callosum—areas of the brain closely 
involved with memory formation and higher cortical activities. Finally, 
brains of persons with AD are also characterized by a diffuse and 
widespread invasion of reactive astrocytes, mostly concentrated in the 
hippocampus and around areas of neuronal loss. These astrocytic changes are 
not specific to AD and can be observed in other neurodegenerative disorders 
associated with inflammation and neurotoxic insults. 



FIGURE 59-1. 
Smallsectionof the 
neocortexfroma 
patient 
withAlzheimer disease 
showing 
twoclassicalneuropathologic 
lesions 
of the 
disease. 
A. 
The 
modifiedsilver stainingshows 
one 
dense 
senile 
(amyloid) plaque 
indicatedbythree 
arrowheads. 
The 
plaque 
consists 
of aggregated 
extracellular deposits 
of amyloidβ-peptide 
(Aβ) fragments 
surroundedbysilver-positive 
dystrophic 
neurites. 
The 
arrow 
indicates 
a 
neuroncontainingneurofibrillarytangles,which 
appear as 
darkmasses 
of abnormalfilaments 
occupyingmostof the 
cytoplasm. 
B. 
The 
image 
shows 
higher magnificationof twoneurons 
containingneurofibrillarytangles 
(indicated 
by 
arrows). 
(ReproducedwithpermissionfromShahriar Salamat,MD,PhD,Universityof 
WisconsinSchoolof Medicine 
andPublic 
Health,Department 
of PathologyandLaboratory 
Medicine.) 


The dominant component of the amyloid plaque core is Aβ organized in 
fibrils of approximately 7 to 10 nm intermixed with nonfibrillar forms of the 
peptide. Neuritic plaques are characterized by a dense core of aggregated 
fibrillar Aβ, surrounded by dystrophic dendrites and axons, activated 



microglia, and reactive astrocytes. In addition, diffuse deposits of Aβ, likely 
representing a prefibrillary form of the aggregated peptide, are found without 
any surrounding dystrophic neurites, astrocytes, or microglia. These diffuse 
plaques can be found in limbic and association cortices, as well as in the 
cerebellum. 


The other neuropathologic hallmark of AD is the presence of 
neurofibrillary tangles found exclusively in the cytoplasm of neurons (see 
Figure 59-1). The tangles appear as paired, helically twisted protein 
filaments composed of highly stable polymers of cytoplasmic proteins called 
tau. Tau comprises a group of alternatively spliced proteins found in the 
cytoplasm that possess either three or four microtubule-binding domains and 
can assemble with tubulin, thus helping the formation of cross bridges 
between adjacent microtubules. Tau proteins can be phosphorylated in 
multiple sites, and the degree of phosphorylation is inversely correlated with 
binding to microtubules. As a result, highly phosphorylated tau proteins 
dissociate from microtubules and polymerize into filaments forming 
neurofibrillary tangles. In addition to AD, the abnormal accumulation of 
filamentous tau is observed in frontotemporal forms of dementia, progressive 
supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and Pick disease. Contrary to 
prior belief, tau proteins themselves can cause dementia, and multiple 
mutations in the 
tau gene have been found in frontotemporal dementia (FTD) 
with parkinsonism. The precise role of tau proteins in the pathogenesis of 
AD and their potential interaction with Aβ are still unclear. 


In 2012, NIA and the Alzheimer’s Association published revised criteria 
for AD neuropathologic change. These criteria recommended reporting on 
the presence and extent of hallmark lesions for AD observed at autopsy 
independent of the individual’s cognitive state. These new guidelines took 
into account several well-established neuropathologic scoring criteria and 
integrated them into an “ABC score” based on three parameters (Amyloid, 
Braak, CERAD): criterion “A” ranks the Aβ plaque score (based on criteria 
from Thal et al.), criterion “B” measures the neurofibrillary tangle stage 
(modified from Braak criteria), and criterion “C” assesses the neuritic 
plaque score (modified from the Consortium to Establish a Registry for 
Alzheimer Disease [CERAD]). For reporting, these ABC scores are then 
transformed into one of four levels of neuropathic change: none, low, 
intermediate, or high. While CAA is not considered in the “ABC” score, the 
guidelines recognize that these changes frequently co-occur with 



parenchymal Aβ plaques and recommend neuropathologists comment on such 
changes separately within the neuropathology report. 


Amyloid Precursor Protein Processing and Generation of Aβ 


Aβ is a 39 to 43 amino acid hydrophobic peptide proteolytically released 
from a much larger precursor, APP. Although APP is the major source of 
toxic Aβ, it also exerts several important functions in the nervous system, 
including serving as a cell-surface receptor, growth factor, protease inhibitor, 
cell–cell interaction molecule, coreceptor/partner in the endocytic/lysosomal 
network, coagulation inhibitor factor, cell-surface scaffold protein, kinesininteracting 
molecule for axonal transport, and transcription factor. The 
generation of Aβ from APP (Figure 59-2) requires the sequential recruitment 
of two enzymatic activities: β-secretase, also called BACE1, and γsecretase, 
a multimeric protein complex containing presenilin, nicastrin, 
Aph-1, Pen-2, and CD147. The β-cleavage is the rate-limiting step and 
occurs before the γ-cleavage. It liberates a large N-terminal fragment of the 
protein (sβAPP) that is released in the extracellular milieu and a small (~12 
kDa) membrane-anchored fragment called β-APP-CTF (or C99). The release 
of the large N-terminal domain allows subsequent γ-cleavage, and liberation 
of Aβ and the signaling of active intracellular domain (AICD) of APP (see 
Figure 59-2). Generation of Aβ40 and Aβ42 results from γ-cleavage of Aβ 
at positions 40 and 42, respectively. The release of Aβ in the extracellular 
milieu is followed by oligomerization and aggregation in the form of fibrils 
and amyloid plaques. Additionally, small Aβ aggregates are also found in the 
soma of the neurons suggesting that the Aβ fragments can escape secretion 
and aggregate in the intracellular environment. The molecular mechanisms 
underlying the toxicity of Aβ are still being investigated and currently 
incompletely understood. However, research seems to indicate that small Aβ 
aggregates (oligomers), which represent the “preplaque” neurotoxic species 
of Aβ, act as the proximate cause of neuronal injury and synaptic loss 
associated with AD. Additionally, the C-terminal tail of APP can undergo 
further processing at amino acid 664 of APP695 liberating two small 
cytosolic fragments, Jcasp and C31. Both of these fragments are generated 
only after γ-cleavage, require caspase-mediated processing of APP, and can 
activate proapoptotic pathways in a variety of cellular systems. 



FIGURE 59-2. 
Generationof amyloidβ-peptide 
(Aβ) fromamyloidprecursor protein(APP). 
APP 
is 
a 
type 
1membrane 
proteinwitha 
large 
extracellular domain,a 
single 
membranespanningdomain,
anda 
short 
cytoplasmic 
tail. 
The 
Aβ 
regionof APP 
(in 
yellow) includes 
the 
first 
12to14aminoacids 
of the 
membrane 
domain. 
(A) Shows 
a 
schematic 
image 
of APP 
on 
the 
cellsurface 
of a 
neuron,whereas 
(B) provides 
a 
closer view 
of APP 
processing. 
The 
initial 
enzymatic 
stepfor the 
generationof Aβ 
requires 
proteolysis 
of APP 
at 
β-site 
(aminoacid1of 
the 
Aβ 
region). 
This 
event 
liberates 
a 
large 
N-terminalfragment 
(sβAPP) that 
is 
rapidly 
secretedintothe 
extracellular milieuanda 
smallC-terminalfragment 
(β-APP-CTF) of 99amino 
acids 
(alsocalledC99). 
The 
removalof sβAPP 
most 
likelyinduces 
a 
conformationalchange 
that 
allows 
subsequent 
cleavage 
byγ-secretase. 
Once 
generated,the 
Aβ 
peptides 
aggregate 
in 
the 
braininthe 
formof plaques. 
Further cleavage 
of β-APP-CTFat 
the 
site 
liberates 
the 
signalingactive 
APP 
intracellular domain(AICD). 
Inadditiontothe 
above 
β/γ 
pathway,APP 
canalsobe 
cleavedat 
the 
α-site 
(betweenaminoacids 
16and17of the 
Aβ 
region) precluding 
the 
generationof Aβ. 



The most critical clinical link between Aβ and AD came from the 
observation that patients with Down syndrome (trisomy 21) had a higher 
propensity for developing a clinical and pathologic phenotype resembling 
AD, thereby suggesting a potential association between AD and chromosome 


21. This observation was further strengthened by the fact that Aβ was the 
major component in plaques from both patients with Down syndrome and 
AD, and that its genesis was related to a gene (APP) located on chromosome 
21, close to the obligate Down syndrome region. Following the identification 
of APP, several groups found mutations in the 
APP gene that were linked to 
familial forms of AD. Given that the duplication of the 
APP locus could 
result in early AD and that Down syndrome patients with partial trisomy 21 
developed AD only when the trisomy was proximal to the 
APP locus, the 
potential direct relationship between APP metabolism and AD seems strong. 
Furthermore, causative mutations in the genes that encode for PS1 and PS2, 
which are also implicated in the metabolism of APP, have been found and are 
associated with familial forms of AD, thereby conferring additional strength 
to the linkage between APP/Aβ metabolism and AD. 
Although the generation of Aβ from APP seems to be a pivotal step in the 
pathobiology of AD, it does not explain all the neuropathologic changes 
observed in patients with AD. For example, examination of the brain of 
transgenic mice expressing human APP harboring one or more familial ADassociated 
mutations reveals the presence of amyloid plaques and some 
synaptic loss and cognitive deficits, but absence of tau pathology and 
astrocytosis. This suggests that additional biochemical/molecular events are 
required to develop the full pathologic spectrum of AD. To circumvent this 
issue, several new animal models have been generated where human APP is 
accompanied by additional genes. These genes include the 
presenilins 
(harboring familial AD-associated mutations), tau, and APOE. Recently, 
several transgenic mice models harboring three or five familial ADassociated 
mutations (respectively called 3X and 5X mice) in two or more 
genes have been generated. All of these models demonstrate that Aβ is an 
essential element for the development of AD-like neuropathology and 
revealed a close relationship between Aβ and the 
phosphorylation/aggregation state of tau. However, none of the mouse models 
fully reproduce the classical AD phenotype, thereby again suggesting that Aβ 
seems to be necessary but not sufficient to produce the entire spectrum of AD 
neuropathology. Transgenic mice expressing the human microtubule



associated protein tau develop the typical tau-related pathology found in 
individuals suffering from FTD with parkinsonism; however, they do not 
develop amyloid plaques, suggesting that tau is not required for the formation 
of plaques. Crossing these mice with APP transgenic mice potentiates taurelated 
pathology and neuronal loss but does not aggravate plaque pathology, 
suggesting that Aβ acts upstream of tau in the classical AD phenotype. 
However, studies from patients with AD, mouse models, and ex vivo cellular 
systems indicate that Aβ and tau can interact synergistically, thereby fostering 
their respective aggregation and neuronal loss. Thus, the true relationship 
between Aβ and tau is more complex than previously thought and likely 
involves additional molecular and biochemical pathways acting upstream of 
both Aβ and tau production in the AD brain. 


CLINICAL PRESENTATION 


The most common clinical onset of AD is an amnestic presentation, 
characterized by slowly progressive memory loss for recent events. Patients 
with AD frequently have problems remembering recent conversations, dates, 
appointments, and may misplace items. Many patients are not aware of these 
deficits and are brought to medical attention by their family members or 
friends. For some patients, memory loss symptoms are first noted by others 
during a stressful life event, such as the patient’s hospitalization or the death 
of a spouse; however, a thorough interview frequently reveals that the 
cognitive deficits preceded such an event by months to years. The memory 
deficits of AD are generally differentiated from those caused by normal aging 
by the fact that AD-related deficits are progressive and interfere with the 
individual’s usual daily activities. Memory loss leading to a change in 
functional status is not a part of normal aging and warrants further evaluation. 


Nonamnestic presentations of AD are also common and may include 
prominent initial impairments in language abilities, visuospatial skills, and 
executive function. As these presentations are less commonly recognized by 
patients, families, and clinicians alike as being early symptoms related to 
AD, individuals with nonamnestic presentations are frequently misdiagnosed 
or experience a delay in diagnosis. In addition to the more common amnestic 
presentation, nonamnestic presentations are specifically identified in the 
NIA-AA diagnostic criteria for AD (see 
Table 59-1). Patients who initially 
present with language impairment frequently will complain of marked word



finding problems with subsequent progression to paraphasic errors and 
circumlocution. AD patients with a visuospatial presentation may have 
prominent deficits in spatial cognition, including poor object and face 
recognition, an inability to perceive multiple visual elements simultaneously, 
and difficulty understanding written language. Executive dysfunction is 
another common initial presenting symptom of AD, leading to impairments in 
reasoning, judgment, problem solving, and an inability to complete complex 
demanding tasks. Deficits in concentration and attention frequently occur in 
patients with AD, but these changes may also be notable in persons with 
depression, attention deficit disorder, sleep disorders, or adverse medication 
effects. 


As the disease progresses, changes in personality are commonly seen in 
patients with AD and may include increased passivity, lack of interest, 
agitation, restlessness, and/or overactivity. AD patients may exhibit 
increased irritability when confronted with memory loss symptoms, such as 
when struggling to find a word, being reminded of a prior conversation or 
event, or searching for a misplaced item. More than 30% of persons with AD 
develop symptoms of depression, which may be the first clinical presentation 
of the disease. Early signs of depression in patients with AD include 
increased irritability, alterations in appetite or sleep, trouble concentrating or 
making decisions, low energy, social withdrawal, and a decline in physical 
function. Worsening of behavior and cognitive symptoms in the evening is 
also common in patients with AD and may be related to changes in circadian 
rhythm from loss of sunlight. 


In the later stages of the disease, individuals may have increased 
confusion, dysphagia, impaired gait, and repeated falls. In some patients with 
AD, disruptive behaviors may increase with aggression, agitation, and 
physical or verbal hostility; in others, these behavioral symptoms lessen with 
disease progression. The majority of patients become increasingly frail and 
dependent for self-care and activities of daily living with many patients 
developing bowel and bladder incontinence. Persons in the late stages of AD 
may become immobile and bed-bound, which increases their risk of 
developing pressure sores, malnutrition, and dehydration. The most common 
causes of death in patients with AD include pneumonia, urinary sepsis, 
dehydration, pressure sores, fractures, and malnutrition. The median survival 
period from the time of diagnosis to death generally ranges from 7 to 10 
years, although some patients, especially those with familial AD, die earlier. 



EVALUATION 


For many older patients with cognitive complaints, their evaluation, 
diagnosis, and management may be effectively completed within a primary 
care setting. If available, utilization of multidisciplinary team members from 
nursing, social work, psychology, and/or pharmacy can greatly aid a primary 
care physician in the diagnosis and management of patients with cognitive 
concerns. A smaller subset of patients will need more in-depth 
neuropsychological assessment and clinical evaluation from a dementia 
specialist. The NIA-AA clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia, AD, and 
MCI (see 
Tables 59-1 and 59-2) were designed to be used across all clinical 
settings, including primary care, specialty clinics, and long-term care. The 
clinical diagnoses of MCI and dementia are primarily ascertained through 
completion of a focused interview with the patient and an informant who 
knows the patient well, a thorough review of the patient’s medical history 
and medication use, a comprehensive physical examination, a formal 
assessment of cognitive function, basic laboratory tests, and neuroimaging 
(Table 59-3). While the differential diagnosis for AD is extensive (Table 594), 
a systematic approach to dementia diagnosis can help primary care 
clinicians identify common confounding medical and psychiatric conditions 
and medications that can adversely affect cognition. In addition, a structured 
evaluation may facilitate accurate diagnosis of the most common causes of 
dementia—AD and AD mixed with vascular dementia as well as 
predementia syndromes such as MCI. Integrating various established 
diagnostic criteria, Figure 59-3 shows a primary care diagnostic algorithm 
developed to guide clinicians in their assessment of patients with cognitive 
complaints. 


TABLE 59-2■NIA-AA CORE CLINICAL DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIAFOR MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT

FIGURE 59-3. 
Algorithmfor the 
clinicaldiagnosis 
of Alzheimer disease. 


Identification of a cognitive concern is the first step in the evaluation. 
While early cognitive changes in some patients may be readily identified by 
the individuals themselves, their families, and/or their clinicians, such 
symptoms may not be as apparent in other patients due to a variety of factors, 
including poor insight, attribution of such changes to normal aging, cultural 
views of dementia, or lack of corroborative history from others. Whether all 
older adults should undergo routine screening for dementia remains 
controversial. The US Preventive Services Task Force recommends against 
routine screening for dementia in asymptomatic older adults based on 
insufficient evidence that such widespread screening impacts individual or 
societal outcomes. However, the US Medicare Annual Wellness Visit 
requires that clinicians assess cognitive function by “direct observation,” 
although no cognitive screening tool is endorsed. In an effort to 
operationalize the Medicare Annual Wellness Visit requirements, the 
Alzheimer’s Association recommends using self-reported memory concerns, 
clinician observations, or concerns from a person who knows the patient 
well to trigger a formal memory assessment. Screening questions such as 
“Does your memory bother you?” or “Do you think your memory is worse 
than others of your age?” also may be used to determine which older patients 



need a formal evaluation of cognitive performance. Identifying memory 
concerns through self-report or screening questions may reduce the number of 
unnecessary formal cognitive screening tests administered to asymptomatic 
adults at low risk for dementia. However, individuals without a close 
informant may need structured cognitive tests to identify memory concerns. 
When a cognitive concern is identified, a separate clinic visit should be 
arranged to investigate the underlying cause (see 
Figure 59-3 and Table 593). 


TABLE 59-3■EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT WITHCOGNITIVE CONCERNS

Within a dedicated primary care clinic visit, an optimal cognitive 
assessment includes gathering information not only from the patient’s 
perspective, but also independently in a separate interview from an informant 
who knows the patient well. Depending on available time and resources, an 
independent informant interview may be accomplished through utilizing a 
variety of health care team members, such as social workers, medical 
assistants, nurses, or psychologists to conduct a brief structured informant 
interview or a full detailed assessment. Important historical elements include 
establishing when the cognitive symptoms began and the very first symptoms 
noted (such as problems with memory, language, executive function, apraxia, 
or personality changes). A careful delineation of the time course of 
progression will narrow the differential diagnosis and will help identify 
whether there are multiple contributing factors or one underlying process. 
Frequently, an inciting event that disrupts coping skills, such as a 
hospitalization or the death of a spouse, will draw the attention of family 
members to a patient’s memory problems. The family may give a history of 
an acute onset of memory impairment following the inciting event, but careful 
questioning may identify cognitive problems preceding that time period and 
point to a gradually progressive course. 


A key component to the interview is establishing the patient’s baseline 
cognitive and functional performance, taking into account past educational 
opportunities, estimated baseline intellectual function, occupational history, 
and prior established skills and abilities. Understanding the patient’s 



baseline function will put neuropsychological test results into context in 
order to prevent over- or underdiagnosing dementia in patients who present 
with cognitive concerns. Changes in the person’s ability to carry out tasks 
related to their occupation, hobbies, household management, and other 
volunteer activities should then be ascertained. 


There are common reversible causes of cognitive dysfunction that next 
should be addressed. One of the first steps should be a careful review of 
prescription and nonprescription medications. Drugs with known 
anticholinergic properties (such as antihistamines, tricyclic antidepressants, 
bladder antispasmodic agents, etc) or sedating side effects (such as highdose 
gabapentin, other antiepileptic medications, narcotic analgesics, 
benzodiazepines, sleeping aids, etc) should be carefully reviewed to see if 
the benefit of the offending medication outweighs the adverse cognitive 
effects. Patients should be included in shared decision-making with any 
medication adjustments as the value placed on various symptoms is likely to 
differ between individuals. 


Clinicians should carefully evaluate their older patients for depression, 
anxiety, or other mood disorders that can affect cognitive performance. 
Depression may be a prodromal syndrome prior to dementia onset, but also 
commonly co-occurs with this syndrome. Pointed questions assessing for 
changes in sleep duration and/or quality, interest in activities, feelings of 
guilt, loss of energy, impaired concentration, changes in appetite, 
psychomotor slowing, and suicidal thoughts should be assessed. A brief 
screening tool such as the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) can be 
administered by a health care team member or self-administered while the 
patient is waiting for the clinician. Older patients with depression frequently 
complain of problems with poor concentration and forgetfulness and may 
perform poorly on tests of attention, speed of processing, and memory. In 
such patients, it is important to differentiate a loss of interest related to 
depression from a lack of initiative due to a neurodegenerative disorder. 
Treating depression and anxiety may lead to improvements in cognitive 
performance as well as mood. 


Hearing loss may mimic cognitive dysfunction as patients who cannot 
hear well may not be able to properly encode new information from 
conversations or other auditory-received information. Questions on hearing 
loss symptoms and use and fit of any prescribed hearing aids can alert the 
provider as to whether hearing loss is contributing to cognitive symptoms or 



if further hearing evaluation is needed (see 
Chapter 34 for approach to 
screening for hearing loss). 


A careful assessment of alcohol use should be completed in all patients, 
especially if cognitive performance varies widely from visit to visit or if the 
patient lives alone. Risk for obstructive sleep apnea should be assessed with 
several screening questions assessing the patient’s snoring, witnessed apneic 
episodes, excessive daytime sleepiness, or nonrestorative sleep. In patients 
with diagnosed sleep apnea, their ability to effectively and regularly use their 
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device should be assessed and 
any difficulties should be reported to the sleep medicine and/or respiratory 
therapy team to seek out other mask options for better fit and tolerance. 
Obstructive sleep apnea with its related hypoxia can cause profound effects 
on cognition. 


Vascular disease may contribute to cognitive impairment through a 
variety of mechanisms. In addition to stroke causing acute cognitive decline, 
chronic low cerebral blood flow leading to subclinical hypoperfusion may 
also contribute to cognitive impairment and AD. Thus, a careful assessment 
of vascular risk factors should be completed to make sure they are well 
treated. Carotid bruits or a history of sudden cognitive changes should 
prompt work-up for cerebrovascular disease with neuroimaging (computed 
tomography [CT] or preferably magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) and 
either carotid ultrasound or magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA). 


Delirium is associated with an acute or subacute onset of fluctuating 
cognitive dysfunction and may be caused by a wide variety of medical 
conditions and medications. In patients with delirium, a careful history 
frequently can tease out the temporal relationship between the onset of 
potentially reversible cognitive symptoms and contributing underlying 
medical problems or medications. Patients who have had a significant medial 
illness may exhibit signs of delirium for weeks to months following the 
inciting illness. Care should be made to avoid making a diagnosis of 
dementia in the presence of a resolving delirium. Since dementia is a risk 
factor for delirium, however, the presence of a delirium may suggest an 
underlying neurodegenerative disorder. 


Additional information on safety should be obtained, including inquiries 
on medication management, driving, kitchen safety, use of firearms or heavy 
equipment or power tools, wandering, and susceptibility to financial scams. 
A review of systems should include questions on depression, tremors, falls, 



visual hallucinations, symptoms of stroke or transient ischemic attack, ataxia, 
dysphagia, urinary incontinence, waxing and waning level of consciousness, 
agitation, and personality changes. 


The patient’s past medical history should be reviewed for medical and 
psychiatric conditions affecting cognition, including cardiovascular and 
cerebrovascular disease and associated risk factors, surgical procedures 
including coronary artery bypass surgery, significant hearing loss, 
depression, Parkinson disease, TBI, seizures, and/or heavy alcohol use. A 
thorough medication review should be conducted to assess all prescription 
and nonprescription medications and the association of any medication 
initiation and/or dose adjustment with changes in cognitive symptoms. 
Patients should be encouraged to bring in all pill bottles to the clinic visit. 
The social history should assess the patient’s education and occupational 
baseline, their social support network, and their use of community resources. 
An accurate assessment of prior or current alcohol or illicit drug use and a 
sexual history with special attention to sexually transmitted disease (notably 
syphilis and HIV) risk factors are critical to a correct diagnosis. An 
assessment of family history of dementia should include age of onset and time 
course of any symptoms of family members with memory loss. 


The physical examination should include assessment of general 
appearance and a mental status examination (see 
Table 59-3). Careful 
observation upon interviewing a patient can provide rich information as to 
their ability to care for themselves, their organizational ability, their ability 
to provide detail within their conversation, and their comprehension of posed 
questions and the appropriateness of their response. Ears should be checked 
for any cerumen accumulation and/or hearing loss. A neurologic examination 
should screen for focal deficits, gaze palsies, increased muscle tone, 
cogwheeling, tremors, and ataxia. A detailed review of a comprehensive 
mental status and neurologic examination in older adults is described in 
Chapter 9. Cardiac arrhythmias, carotid bruits, or abdominal or femoral 
bruits may suggest a vascular contribution. The remainder of the physical 
examination should focus on ascertaining any major medical conditions that 
could have significant cognitive effects, such as hypoxia or significant active 
infection. 


While there is no consensus as to which is the best cognitive screening 
tool, there are a variety of cognitive screening tests that have been validated 
in a primary care setting. Clinicians should identify several with which they 



are comfortable so that they can be used consistently over time with their 
patient population. The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), the 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), and the Saint Louis University 
Mental Status Examination (SLUMS) have been widely used in primary care 
settings. The Alzheimer’s Association recommends use of the General 
Practitioner Assessment of Cognition (GPCOG), the Mini-Cog, or the 
Memory Impairment Screen (MIS) for cognitive screening related to the 
Medicare Annual Wellness Visit, as these tests take less than 5 minutes to 
administer, have good psychometric properties, and can be administered by a 
variety of health care team members. Informant assessment of changes in 
patient performance may include the GPCOG informant questionnaire, the 
Eight-Item Interview to Differentiate Aging and Dementia (AD8), or the 
Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly (IQCODE) (see 
Table 59-3). If time and resources allow, additional interview time with an 
informant may identify specific areas of safety concerns and help tailor the 
management plan. 


In adults with high baseline cognitive functions, these screening tests may 
be normal in the presence of obvious functional impairment necessitating 
referral to a neuropsychologist for more detailed cognitive testing. In 
individuals with lower educational levels or learning disabilities, cognitive 
screening tests may suggest impairment, but the history may not suggest any 
changes in functional status. Thus, it is critical to use age- and educationadjusted 
norms, and integrate historical information on baseline function to 
decide if further neuropsychological testing is warranted or if abnormal 
testing actually reflects the patient’s baseline cognitive performance. 


Laboratory data can assist in identifying factors that may be contributing 
to cognitive decline. Rarely do these factors alone account for the overall 
cognitive changes that lead to the presentation of a patient with significant 
memory loss. Nevertheless, treating such factors may improve cognitive 
symptoms in patients with pronounced laboratory abnormalities, numerous 
comorbid illnesses, or an underlying neurodegenerative process. 
Recommended laboratory tests include vitamin B12, folate, thyroid


stimulating hormone (TSH), electrolytes, complete blood count, liver 
enzymes, and 25-OH vitamin D. If symptoms are atypical or if there are 
specific risk factors, then an HIV test or serologic test for syphilis may be 
performed. In patients with assumed heavy alcohol use, thiamine (vitamin 
B1) levels should be checked. In some European countries, routine 



assessment of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for β-amyloid and tau levels is done 
as part of the clinical evaluation. While CSF β-amyloid and tau levels may 
increase diagnostic accuracy of MCI and dementia due to AD, in general they 
are not recommended for widespread clinical practice as in most cases they 
do not change a patient’s management plan. CSF collection may be used in 
memory specialty clinics, though, to differentiate between different 
dementias, including Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, normal pressure 
hydrocephalus (NPH), or other less-common causes of neurodegeneration 
(see 
Table 59-4). Genetic testing for 
APOE ε4 genotype is not recommended 
in routine clinical practice. Testing for 
PSEN1, PSEN2, or 
APP genes should 
be reserved for specialists evaluating cases in which there is a suspicion for 
familial AD. 


TABLE 59-4■DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS FOR ALZHEIMERDISEASE
In patients with documented cognitive impairment, it is recommended that 
either a CT or MRI scan of the brain be obtained. If neuroimaging was 



obtained for another indication prior to the onset of cognitive symptoms, in 
most cases the patient should be reimaged. Typical findings for AD on 
neuroimaging can range from a fairly normal scan to focal or diffuse cerebral 
atrophy. A CT of the head without contrast is usually sufficient to screen for 
significant cerebrovascular disease, brain tumors, subdural hematoma, or 
NPH. MRI can provide more information if lacunar infarcts are suspected. 
MRA may be helpful in identifying significant stenosis that could cause 
hypoperfusion. In persons with suspected seizure disorder or Creutzfeldt– 
Jakob disease, an electroencephalogram (EEG) may be considered. Use of 
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) and 
amyloid PET imaging to differentiate FTD from AD should be reserved for 
specialty clinic use. Tau PET imaging is a novel research tool that is not yet 
approved for clinical practice. 


Formulating a Diagnosis 


Once a cognitive concern is recognized and delirium is ruled out, the 
clinician should identify and document any impaired cognitive domains (such 
as memory, executive function, language, or visuospatial skills) on cognitive 
testing and any functional loss in the individual’s daily activities. Each 
potentially reversible cause of cognitive impairment should be outlined (ie, 
medication side effects, alcohol, sleep apnea, depression, or other medical 
comorbidities) and a plan to address these conditions should be developed. 
Objective cognitive impairment in the context of a supportive clinical history 
plus a decline in the individual’s daily functional abilities are key elements 
necessary to differentiate normal cognitive aging and subjective cognitive 
decline (SCD) from MCI and dementia. With normal aging, individuals may 
experience a decline in mental processing speed and may have more 
difficulty learning new material, but these cognitive changes should not affect 
their usual function within their daily activities. For example, a healthy older 
adult may have more difficulty recalling an acquaintance’s name or learning a 
new computer program, but their cognitive testing should be normal and daily 
functional activities should remain intact. SCD is a term used primarily in 
research settings to broadly describe symptoms within a pre-MCI stage of 
neurodegeneration. SCD is currently defined as a self-identified persistent 
decline in cognitive capacity compared with the individual’s previous 
normal status in a person who still performs in the normal range on 
standardized cognitive tests. An example would be a business manager with 



normal performance on cognitive testing, who has noticed a subjective 
decline in her efficiency in managing numerous projects simultaneously 
despite maintaining a similar work load for many years. It is not yet known 
what percentage of patients presenting with SCD progress on to MCI and 
eventually AD; however, there is converging evidence that risk for 
progression to MCI and dementia increases in persons with SCD. 
Identification of patients with SCD allows clinicians to complete a thorough 
evaluation for other medical, psychological, and medication factors that 
could contribute to cognitive decline. Patients with SCD should be screened 
for cognitive dysfunction annually to evaluate for objective evidence of a 
decline in cognitive performance. 


Once a person with SCD develops deficits in at least one cognitive 
domain, they may meet criteria for MCI (see 
Table 59-2), a symptomatic 
predementia syndrome noted in up to 15% to 20% of older adults. 
Individuals with MCI may present with cognitive complaints and describe a 
variety of methods they use to compensate for these cognitive changes, such 
as increasing use of lists, calendars, alarms, and other reminders. They 
maintain their level of function, but are less efficient in doing so. For 
example, a cabinetmaker who demonstrates impairment in executive function 
on testing may complain that in order to complete a cabinet work order with 
his same level of quality workmanship, it now takes him 2 to 3 weeks, 
whereas a few years ago he could complete such an order in 1 week. Once 
an individual’s cognitive impairment progresses to the point that they can no 
longer maintain their baseline level of function, they may meet criteria for 
dementia. In the previous example, as the cabinetmaker’s cognition declines 
he may no longer be able complete a cabinet order at all or may finish it with 
poorer-quality workmanship. At that point he may have progressed to a 
dementia. 


Approximately 12% to 15% of persons with MCI will progress each 
year to AD or other forms of dementia. MCI patients who have impairment in 
memory performance (single-domain amnestic MCI) or in memory plus 
another cognitive area (multidomain amnestic MCI) are more likely to 
progress to AD. Older individuals with nonamnestic MCI may be more likely 
to progress to other forms of dementia, such as FTD, dementia with Lewy 
bodies, or vascular dementia. Once a diagnosis of dementia is suspected, the 
clinician must differentiate between various causes of dementia. AD is the 
most common form of dementia in the United States, accounting for 50% to 



90% of all dementia cases. Dementia with Lewy bodies, vascular dementia, 
and FTD are other common forms of dementia (Table 59-5). Details of the 
clinical and pathologic features of these dementias are covered inChapter 


63. Differentiating AD from other causes of memory loss can help clinicians 
choose effective therapies, anticipate behavior changes and other potential 
complications, and provide patients and caregivers information on prognosis. 
TABLE 59-5■CLINICAL FEATURES OF COMMON DEMENTIAS
If a patient does not meet the criteria for AD yet clinical suspicion 
remains, the clinician may consider obtaining more detailed 
neuropsychological testing or repeating screening cognitive testing in 6 to 12 
months to clarify the diagnosis as the symptoms become more apparent. 
Persons with suspected MCI should be reassessed on an annual basis to 
evaluate for progression to dementia. If the symptoms or course of the 
disease are atypical for AD, the level of functional decline is out of 
proportion to neuropsychological testing results, or if there are significant 



behavioral issues that need to be addressed, then referral to a geriatrician, 
neurologist, or psychiatrist with expertise in dementia is recommended. 


Future Diagnostic Tools 


Novel biomarkers are continually being investigated for use in the diagnosis 
of AD and other types of dementia, as well as in identifying predementia 
syndromes. Many of these tools are still used chiefly in research settings, but 
are being studied to evaluate their potential role in clinical practice. Current 
investigations are focusing on specific neuroimaging modalities and 
biomarkers (including blood and CSF) with strong relationships to clinically 
relevant outcomes that could be used not only for diagnosis of dementia, but 
also for identifying asymptomatic persons at risk for cognitive decline. 
Neuroimaging modalities have shown great promise in documenting not only 
the late effects of neuronal damage in AD (regional and global cerebral 
atrophy), but also in identifying preclinical pathology (such as in vivo 
amyloid and tau imaging on PET) and the functional consequences of such 
pathology (such as changes in activation patterns on functional MRI or 
glucose uptake on FDG-PET). CSF levels of Aβ and tau have been shown to 
predict risk for progression to AD in older adults and persons with MCI. 
With the recent advances in the safety and acceptability of lumbar punctures, 
CSF markers may eventually find their way into the widespread clinical 
diagnostic work-up of preclinical AD. Identification of reliable blood 
biomarkers is a rapidly expanding field with significant clinical applications. 
Future research is focusing on how novel biomarkers may be used in 
combination with cognitive tests to identify which individuals are at greatest 
risk for AD, who would benefit most from preventive therapies, and how 
effective these therapies are in modifying the underlying disease process in 
asymptomatic and symptomatic individuals. 


Updated NIA-AA Research Framework 


As noted earlier, the NIA-AA criteria for AD diagnosis were created in 
2011. In April 2018, the NIA-AA released a report proposing a new 
research framework for studying AD that served to update the 2011 
guidelines with subsequent scientific progress. The most important, 
paradigm-shifting change in the 2018 report was redefining AD by its 
biological changes in the brain rather than the clinical phenotype. By moving 
away from the prior definition based on clinical-pathological presentation to 



biological characterization, the NIA-AA framework aimed to create a 
common language in research studies, allow for more aligned comparison of 
research findings, and facilitate future clinical trials. 


The current clinical framework for diagnosing AD is based on symptoms 
reported by the patient and corroborated by a collateral historian, together 
with an objective assessment of cognitive decline. The level of confidence in 
this diagnosis ranges from possible to probable, depending on the presence 
of typical symptoms, as well as the absence of alternative causes of cognitive 
decline. A biological diagnosis of AD, which is considered the only 
definitive diagnosis, presently relies on autopsy findings of amyloid plaques 
and tau neurofibrillary tangles. Numerous studies have found discordant 
findings between clinical diagnoses and neuropathological outcomes. It is 
reported that 10% to 30% of clinically diagnosed persons with AD dementia 
do not display the neuropathological hallmarks of amyloid plaques and tau 
neurofibrillary tangles on autopsy. Differentiating the clinical syndrome, 
composed of symptoms not necessarily specific to AD, from the biological 
changes seen on neuropathology would allow discovery of novel 
mechanisms underlying AD neurobiology. Furthermore, enrollment of 
participants with biologically confirmed AD diagnosis will be critical in 
evaluating efficacy of disease-modifying therapies as they become available 
in the future. 


The 2018 updated research framework proposed a biomarker 
classification system called AT(N). The framework categorizes individuals 
based on the presence or absence of the following core AD pathological 
features: aggregated amyloid beta protein (A), aggregated tau protein (T), 
and neurodegeneration or neuronal injury (N). The biomarkers for amyloid 
and tau were selected for their high specificity to AD-related changes found 
in autopsy studies. In the AT(N) framework, AD is defined by the presence of 
both amyloid (A) and tau (T). Since neurodegeneration is not a feature used 
in the neuropathological diagnosis of AD and is seen in other 
neurodegenerative disorders as well, it is in parentheses in the proposed 
research framework. However, its inclusion in the framework was necessary 
to reflect disease severity. Table 59-6 provides a list of validated 
biomarkers used to identify each component of the AT(N) framework. 


TABLE 59-6■CSF BIOMARKERS OF ALZHEIMER DISEASE

The AT(N) framework has accelerated discovery of novel CSF and more 
recently blood-based biomarkers of amyloid, tau, neurodegeneration, 
neuroinflammation, and other pathological changes seen in AD. Many of 
these biomarkers, especially the core AD biomarkers including Aβ-42, total 
tau (t-tau), and phosphorylated tau-181 (p-tau-181), can now be reliably 
measured in CSF and correlate well with PET brain imaging and 
neuropathological findings. Although validation of various AD biomarkers in 
CSF, blood, and autopsy brain studies is ongoing, they are being actively 
used to enroll participants in treatment trials and clinical and translational 
studies. Based on data emerging from longitudinal cohort studies and 
randomized clinical trials, the reported accumulation of AD biomarkers over 
time points to a continuum of disease progression, as opposed to the older 
clinical conceptualization of distinct levels of disease staging. 


There is converging evidence that amyloid deposition in the brain is the 
first neuropathological change seen in persons with AD. This conclusion is 
based on studies of people with early-onset AD due to an autosomal 
dominant mutation, those living with Down syndrome, and findings from 
transgenic animal models of AD. However, the presence of amyloid alone is 



viewed as only an early stage within the Alzheimer continuum and is 
necessary, but not sufficient, for the biological diagnosis of AD. While the 
amyloid cascade hypothesis suggests amyloid accumulation causes changes 
leading to tau accumulation and eventually neurodegeneration, it is also 
accepted that, unlike tau, amyloid is not strongly linked to cognitive function. 
Amyloid may have downstream effects on tau and neurodegeneration, but the 
AT(N) framework does not assume an order of causality. 


One of the most notable contributions of the AT(N) framework is to 
effectively screen and identify participants for enrollment in clinical trials 
based on their biomarker profile rather than nonspecific clinical 
presentations. The framework also provides validated and uniform 
biological outcome measures to assess the efficacy of disease modifying 
therapies, and determine dose-response relationships. Given AD is a chronic 
and slowly progressive condition, trials to find effective treatments are 
challenged with finding reliable surrogate outcomes that could change 
quickly, rather than wait for alterations in clinical or behavioral phenotype 
that would require longer and costly trials. The AT(N) framework would 
enrich treatment trials with biologically confirmed AD participants at higher 
risk of decline, as well as serve as a surrogate end-point in disease 
modifying therapy trials. Additionally, it could serve as a marker of treatment 
response. 


The AT(N) framework is not meant to be comprehensive and exclusive, 
but rather adaptive to newer scientific discoveries. A new evolution in the 
framework is ATX(N), with “X” representing novel candidate biomarkers to 
help expand and explain underlying mechanisms in AD. Examples of 
potential mechanisms include neuroinflammation, synaptic dysfunction, 
microvascular changes, mitochondrial oxidative damage, glial activation, 
neurochemical deficits, and BBB dysfunction. The ATX(N) framework 
would help expand the scientific understanding of AD as well as investigate 
the heterogeneity of the disease. 


AD Biomarkers 
Cerebrospinal 
fluidAD 
biomarkers Amyloid and tau biomarkers are central in 
identifying AD pathology and will help explore disease heterogeneity. They 
will likely play critical roles in AD, including early diagnosis, disease 
progression, screening, risk prediction, target engagement, treatment 
monitoring, and validation of novel biomarkers. The core AD biomarkers, 



namely amyloid Aβ-42, t-tau, and p-tau181, have been validated through 
multiple CSF, PET brain imaging, and neuropathological studies. Given their 
proven reliability, amyloid and tau biomarkers will serve as a framework for 
identification of novel biomarkers to address contributions from potential 
coexisting pathologies, such as vascular insults, Lewy body dementia, 
Parkinson disease, and TDP (TAR DNA-binding protein)-43 that likely 
contribute to clinical symptoms and cognitive decline. 


In the past decade, new CSF biomarkers have been identified 
representing multiple mechanisms active in AD. These mechanisms include 
glial activation, neuroinflammation, synaptic degeneration, and 
neuronal/axonal death. Importantly, many AD biomarkers can now be 
measured in CSF and several in blood as well. Although the validation of 
CSF biomarkers is currently ongoing, once approved, they will have major 
clinical applications in the diagnosis, progression, and treatment of AD and 
related disorders. Table 59-6 summarizes CSF biomarkers representing 
various molecular pathways active in AD. While some of the CSF 
biomarkers, such as t-tau, NfL, YKL-40, and interleukins, may not be 
specific to AD, they elucidate disease progression and are related to 
symptoms. Measures of neurodegeneration may be particularly important, 
given clinical features of AD tend to track closely with synaptic dysfunction, 
and eventually neuronal death. Synaptic loss is an early pathological change 
in AD and closely associated with cognitive impairment. 


Neuroimaging 
AD 
biomarkers The multimodal neuroimaging AD biomarkers, 
including CAT, MRI, amyloid PET, and tau PET brain scans, have been 
examined over years and validated as effective measures to help in the 
diagnosis and progression of AD, and exclusion of other treatable causes of 
dementia, such as stroke, tumor, or NPH. Recent advances in neuroimaging 
include novel PET radiotracers to image neuroinflammation and translocator 
protein (TSPO) PET and synaptic vesicle protein 2A (SV2A) PET, 
respectively, to study synaptic dysfunction and loss. Clinically, [18F] FDG 
PET is available to visualize synaptic dysfunction, neuronal cell loss, and 
metabolic dysfunction to help differentiate AD from non-AD dementias such 
as FTD and Lewy body disease. Additionally, amyloid PET and tau PET are 
available in research settings, but not yet approved for clinical use or 
reimbursement. Once approved, amyloid and tau PET scans will become 
important for biological diagnosis of AD. 



Blood-basedAD 
biomarkers Although highly informative, the utility of CSF and 
PET biomarkers is limited by their cost, logistical matters and practical 
barriers related to the lumbar puncture procedure. These limitations make 
CSF measures unlikely to become widely used in the clinical setting. 
Consequently, the pursuit of blood-based AD biomarkers has intensified. 
Several AD biomarkers can now be measured in blood through emerging 
analytical techniques. However, a major limitation in broad utility of these 
biomarkers is significant heterogeneity in results due to multiple factors, 
including variance in sample collection, storage, preanalytical processing, 
assays, and data analysis. Among the AD biomarkers that can be measured in 
plasma include Aβ42, Aβ40, total tau, p-tau181, p-tau217, p-tau231, 
neurofilament light (NfL), interleukins, and YKL-40. Highly sensitive mass 
spectrometry assays are used to measure plasma levels of Aβ42, Aβ40, and 
their ratios, while single molecule array (SIMOA) technology is used to 
assay NfL, interleukins, and p-tau and its analogues in plasma. 
Phosphorylation of tau occurs at multiple sites and certain isoforms, such as 
threonine 231 (p-tau231) and threonine 217 (p-tau217) change early in AD 
pathobiology and have been shown to accurately identify amyloid positivity 
along the AD biomarker continuum and clinical spectrum. 


Plasma neurofilament light (NfL), a promising biomarker of 
neurodegeneration, albeit not specific to AD, has been shown to increase in 
persons with cognitive impairment due to many neurodegenerative disorders, 
including AD, Parkinson disease, FTD, and cerebral vascular disease. 
Elevated plasma NfL is a sign of early neuronal death and can increase 
during preclinical stages of AD. The field of plasma AD biomarkers is 
advancing rapidly and new biomarkers that change during early stages of AD 
will become invaluable for early diagnosis, progression from preclinical to 
symptomatic stages of AD, and treatment monitoring and response. However, 
these biomarkers are not yet ready for clinical applications, given that larger 
studies are necessary to validate, examine the relationship with clinical 
phenotype, and harmonize their measurement in plasma. 


MANAGEMENT 


Managing patients with AD involves presentation of the diagnosis, initiation 
of medical therapy, assessment and treatment of concomitant depression 
and/or behavioral concerns, identification of a social support network, 



education of patients and caregivers, provision of caregiver support, and 
initiation of appropriate safety measures. 


Presenting the Diagnosis 


Presenting the diagnosis of AD to a patient is difficult, as it may generate 
significant emotional responses from the patient and their family and trigger 
fear of future demise. Frequently, patients and family members suspect the 
diagnosis before it is presented, but how they respond to the news depends 
on personal coping mechanisms, cultural influences, family dynamics, and 
their preconceived understanding of AD. Clinicians may help patients and 
families adjust to this diagnosis by using an empathetic, yet honest approach 
and by providing them with educational and support resources, including 
those provided by agencies such as the Alzheimer’s Association and the 
National Institute on Aging Alzheimer’s Disease Education and Referral 
(ADEAR) Center. In addition, the clinician should emphasize the goals of 
diagnosing AD in order to take steps to protect the patient’s memory, delay 
the progression of the disease, and maintain the person’s safety. It is widely 
recommended to tell both the patient and family the diagnosis using the term 
“Alzheimer disease,” thus, providing patients and families with a starting 
point for education. Encouraging both persons with the disorder and 
caregivers to utilize resources such as local support groups, community 
resources, and national Alzheimer organizations is an important part of the 
patient management plan. 


Drug Therapy and Nonpharmacologic Therapy 


Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEIs) are the mainstay of therapy for AD. 
AChEIs increase the levels of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine in neuronal 
synapses, thereby enhancing cholinergic activity in the affected brain regions. 
Although 18% to 48% of persons may experience improvements in cognition 
after taking these medications, the majority of patients do not have any 
noticeable improvement, but instead experience a plateau or slowing of their 
rate of cognitive decline. While prior studies raised questions as to the costeffectiveness 
of treating AD patients with AChEIs, newer studies integrating 
generic drug cost estimates have demonstrated that these drugs are costeffective. 
Delaying the progression of cognitive decline may lead to 
improvements in quality of life, reduced caregiver burden, and decreased 
economic cost associated with long-term care. AChEIs have not been shown 



